the portrait of a lady
a photograph
 we re not afraid to die if we
can all be together 
discovering tut the saga
continues
the laburnum top
the voice of the rain
the ailing planet the green
movement s role
childhood
the adventure
silk road
father to son
reprint 
effective reading is receiving from others
their ideas and feelings 
effective reading involves
 understanding the text
 talking about the text
 thinking about language
 working with words
 noticing form and patterns 
reprint 
 the portrait of a lady
khushwant singh
notice these expressions in the text 
infer their meaning from the context 
my grandmother like everybody s grandmother was an old woman 
she had been old and wrinkled for the twenty years that i had known
her people said that she had once been young and pretty and had
even had a husband but that was hard to believe my grandfather s
portrait hung above the mantelpiece in the drawing room he wore a
big turban and loose fitting clothes his long white beard covered the
best part of his chest and he looked at least a hundred years old he
did not look the sort of person who would have a wife or children he
looked as if he could only have lots and lots of grandchildren as for
my grandmother being young and pretty the thought was almost
revolting she often told us of the games she used to play as a child 
that seemed quite absurd and undignified on her part and we treated
it like the fables of the prophets she used to tell us 
she had always been short and fat and slightly bent her face was
a criss cross of wrinkles running from everywhere to everywhere no 
we were certain she had always been as we had known her old so
terribly old that she could not have grown older and had stayed at the
same age for twenty years she could never have been pretty but she
was always beautiful she hobbled about the house in spotless white
with one hand resting on her waist to balance her stoop and the other
 the thought was almost revolting
 an expanse of pure white serenity
 a turning point
 accepted her seclusion with
resignation
 a veritable bedlam of chirrupings
 frivolous rebukes
 the sagging skins of the dilapidated
drum
reprint 
 hornbill
telling the beads of her rosary her silver locks were scattered untidily
over her pale puckered face and her lips constantly moved in inaudible
prayer yes she was beautiful she was like the winter landscape in
the mountains an expanse of pure white serenity breathing peace
and contentment 
my grandmother and i were good friends my parents left me with
her when they went to live in the city and we were constantly together 
she used to wake me up in the morning and get me ready for school 
she said her morning prayer in a monotonous sing song while she
bathed and dressed me in the hope that i would listen and get to know
it by heart i listened because i loved her voice but never bothered to
learn it then she would fetch my wooden slate which she had already
washed and plastered with yellow chalk a tiny earthen ink pot and a
red pen tie them all in a bundle and hand it to me after a breakfast
of a thick stale chapatti with a little butter and sugar spread on it 
we went to school she carried several stale chapattis with her for the
village dogs 
my grandmother always went to school with me because the school
was attached to the temple the priest taught us the alphabet and
the morning prayer while the children sat in rows on either side
of the verandah singing the alphabet or the prayer in a chorus my
grandmother sat inside reading the scriptures when we had both
finished we would walk back together this time the village dogs
would meet us at the temple door they followed us to our home
growling and fighting with each other for the chapattis we threw to
them 
when my parents were comfortably settled in the city they sent for
us that was a turning point in our friendship although we shared
the same room my grandmother no longer came to school with me i
used to go to an english school in a motor bus there were no dogs in
the streets and she took to feeding sparrows in the courtyard of our
city house 
as the years rolled by we saw less of each other for some time she
continued to wake me up and get me ready for school when i came
back she would ask me what the teacher had taught me i would tell
her english words and little things of western science and learning 
the law of gravity archimedes principle the world being round etc 
this made her unhappy she could not help me with my lessons she
did not believe in the things they taught at the english school and was
distressed that there was no teaching about god and the scriptures 
one day i announced that we were being given music lessons she
reprint 
the portrait of a lady 
was very disturbed to her music had lewd associations it was the
monopoly of harlots and beggars and not meant for gentlefolk she
said nothing but her silence meant disapproval she rarely talked to
me after that 
when i went up to university i was given a room of my own the
common link of friendship was snapped my grandmother accepted
her seclusion with resignation she rarely left her spinning wheel to
talk to anyone from sunrise to sunset she sat by her wheel spinning
and reciting prayers only in the afternoon she relaxed for a while to
feed the sparrows while she sat in the verandah breaking the bread
into little bits hundreds of little birds collected round her creating
a veritable bedlam of chirrupings some came and perched on her
legs others on her shoulders some even sat on her head she smiled
but never shooed them away it used to be the happiest half hour of
the day for her 
when i decided to go abroad for further studies i was sure my
grandmother would be upset i would be away for five years and at
her age one could never tell but my grandmother could she was not
even sentimental she came to leave me at the railway station but did
not talk or show any emotion her lips moved in prayer her mind was
lost in prayer her fingers were busy telling the beads of her rosary 
silently she kissed my forehead and when i left i cherished the moist
imprint as perhaps the last sign of physical contact between us 
but that was not so after five years i came back home and was
met by her at the station she did not look a day older she still had
no time for words and while she clasped me in her arms i could
hear her reciting her prayers even on the first day of my arrival her
happiest moments were with her sparrows whom she fed longer and
with frivolous rebukes 
in the evening a change came over her she did not pray she
collected the women of the neighbourhood got an old drum and
started to sing for several hours she thumped the sagging skins of
the dilapidated drum and sang of the home coming of warriors we
had to persuade her to stop to avoid overstraining that was the first
time since i had known her that she did not pray 
the next morning she was taken ill it was a mild fever and the
doctor told us that it would go but my grandmother thought differently 
she told us that her end was near she said that since only a few hours
before the close of the last chapter of her life she had omitted to pray 
she was not going to waste any more time talking to us 
reprint 
 hornbill
we protested but she ignored our protests she lay peacefully
in bed praying and telling her beads even before we could suspect 
her lips stopped moving and the rosary fell from her lifeless fingers 
a peaceful pallor spread on her face and we knew that she was dead 
we lifted her off the bed and as is customary laid her on the ground
and covered her with a red shroud after a few hours of mourning we
left her alone to make arrangements for her funeral in the evening we
went to her room with a crude stretcher to take her to be cremated 
the sun was setting and had lit her room and verandah with a blaze
of golden light we stopped half way in the courtyard all over the
verandah and in her room right up to where she lay dead and stiff
wrapped in the red shroud thousands of sparrows sat scattered on
the floor there was no chirruping we felt sorry for the birds and my
mother fetched some bread for them she broke it into little crumbs 
the way my grandmother used to and threw it to them the sparrows
took no notice of the bread when we carried my grandmother s corpse
off they flew away quietly next morning the sweeper swept the bread
crumbs into the dustbin 
understanding the text
mention
 the three phases of the author s relationship with his grandmother before
he left the country to study abroad 
 three reasons why the author s grandmother was disturbed when he
started going to the city school 
 three ways in which the author s grandmother spent her days after he
grew up 
 the odd way in which the author s grandmother behaved just before she
died 
 the way in which the sparrows expressed their sorrow when the author s
grandmother died 
talking about the text
talk to your partner about the following 
 the author s grandmother was a religious person what are the different
ways in which we come to know this 
reprint 
the portrait of a lady 
 describe the changing relationship between the author and his
grandmother did their feelings for each other change 
 would you agree that the author s grandmother was a person strong in
character if yes give instances that show this 
 have you known someone like the author s grandmother do you feel
the same sense of loss with regard to someone whom you have loved and
lost 
thinking about language
 which language do you think the author and his grandmother used while
talking to each other 
 which language do you use to talk to elderly relatives in your family 
 how would you say a dilapidated drum in your language 
 can you think of a song or a poem in your language that talks of
homecoming 
working with words
i notice the following uses of the word tell in the text 
 her fingers were busy telling the beads of her rosary 
 i would tell her english words and little things of western science and
learning 
 at her age one could never tell 
 she told us that her end was near 
given below are four different senses of the word tell match the meanings
to the uses listed above 
 make something known to someone in spoken or written words
 count while reciting
 be sure
 give information to somebody
ii notice the different senses of the word take 
 to take to something to begin to do something as a habit
 to take ill to suddenly become ill
locate these phrases in the text and notice the way they are used 
iii the word hobble means to walk with difficulty because the legs and feet
are in bad condition 
reprint 
 hornbill
tick the words in the box below that also refer to a manner of walking 
haggle shuffle stride ride waddle
wriggle paddle swagger trudge slog
noticing form
notice the form of the verbs italicised in these sentences 
 my grandmother was an old woman she had been old and wrinkled for
the twenty years that i had known her people said that she had once
been young and pretty and had even had a husband but that was hard
to believe 
 when we both had finished we would walk back together 
 when i came back she would ask me what the teacher had taught me 
 it was the first time since i had known her that she did not pray 
 the sun was setting and had lit her room and verandah with a golden
light 
these are examples of the past perfect forms of verbs when we recount things
in the distant past we use this form 
things to do
talk with your family members about elderly people who you have been
intimately connected with and who are not there with you now write a short
description of someone you liked a lot 
notes
understanding the text
the tasks cover the entire text and help in summarising the various phases
of the autobiographical account and are based on the facts presented 
 ask the students to read the text silently paragraph by paragraph and get
a quick oral feedback on what the main points of each are for example 
para description of grandmother and grandfather s photograph 
 at the end of the unit ask students to answer the comprehension questions
first orally and then in writing in point form 
reprint 
the portrait of a lady 
for example when he went to the 
 village school
 city school
 university
talking about the text
peer interaction about the text is necessary before students engage in writing
tasks the questions raised in this section elicit subjective responses to the
facts in the text and also open up possibilities for relating the events to the
reader s own life and establish the universality of the kind of relationship and
feelings described in the text 
thinking about language
the questions here try to 
 make the reader visualise the language that must have been used by the
author and his grandmother
 think about their own home language
 find equivalents in their language for english phrases
 relate to songs with emotional import in their own language 
working with words
highlight different uses of common words like tell and take words used for
different ways of walking and semantically related word groups you could
add to the items by using the dictionary for vocabulary enrichment 
noticing form
make students notice the use of the past perfect form of the verb that frequently
appear in the text to recount the remote past you could practise the form
with other examples 
things to do
relating the topic of the text to the reader s real life experience writing about
a person who one holds dear 
reprint 
a photograph
shirley toulson
the cardboard shows me how it was
when the two girl cousins went paddling 
each one holding one of my mother s hands 
and she the big girl some twelve years or so 
all three stood still to smile through their hair
at the uncle with the camera a sweet face 
my mother s that was before i was born 
and the sea which appears to have changed less 
washed their terribly transient feet 
some twenty thirty years later
she d laugh at the snapshot see betty
and dolly she d say and look how they
dressed us for the beach the sea holiday
was her past mine is her laughter both wry
with the laboured ease of loss 
now she s been dead nearly as many years
as that girl lived and of this circumstance
there is nothing to say at all 
its silence silences 
infer the meanings of the following words from the context 
 paddling transient
now look up the dictionary to see if your inference is right 
reprint 
a photograph 
think it out
 what does the word cardboard denote in the poem why has this word
been used 
 what has the camera captured 
 what has not changed over the years does this suggest something to
you 
 the poet s mother laughed at the snapshot what did this laugh indicate 
 what is the meaning of the line both wry with the laboured ease of loss 
 what does this circumstance refer to 
 the three stanzas depict three different phases what are they 
notes
poems are included to heighten students sensitivity to literary writing and
to appreciate rhythm and sound patterns in language follow these steps 
 read the poem aloud once without the students looking at the poem 
ask them a few general questions 
 re read the poem with the students looking at the poem ask a few more
questions to check comprehension 
ask students to read the poem silently and answer the questions given 
first orally and then in writing 
 the poem a photograph is placed after the portrait of a lady because of
the thematic relation between the two 
the questions seek to examine factual and inferential comprehension 
establish empathy and draw attention to the structure of the poem and
choice of words 
 we re not afraid to die 
if we can all be together 
gordon cook and alan east
notice these expressions in the text 
infer their meaning from the context 
 honing our seafaring skills pinpricks in the vast ocean
 ominous silence a tousled head
 mayday calls
in july my wife mary son jonathan daughter suzanne and
i set sail from plymouth england to duplicate the round the world
voyage made years earlier by captain james cook for the longest
time mary and i a year old businessman had dreamt of sailing
in the wake of the famous explorer and for the past years we had
spent all our leisure time honing our seafaring skills in british waters 
our boat wavewalker a metre ton wooden hulled beauty 
had been professionally built and we had spent months fitting it out
and testing it in the roughest weather we could find 
the first leg of our planned three year kilometre journey
passed pleasantly as we sailed down the west coast of africa to cape
town there before heading east we took on two crewmen american
larry vigil and swiss herb seigler to help us tackle one of the world s
roughest seas the southern indian ocean 
on our second day out of cape town we began to encounter strong
gales for the next few weeks they blew continuously gales did not
worry me but the size of the waves was alarming up to metres 
as high as our main mast 
reprint 
we re not afraid to die 
december found us kilometres east of cape town 
despite atrocious weather we had a wonderful holiday complete with
a christmas tree new year s day saw no improvement in the weather 
but we reasoned that it had to change soon and it did change for
the worse 
at dawn on january the waves were gigantic we were sailing
with only a small storm jib and were still making eight knots as the
ship rose to the top of each wave we could see endless enormous seas
rolling towards us and the screaming of the wind and spray was
painful to the ears to slow the boat down we dropped the storm jib
and lashed a heavy mooring rope in a loop across the stern then we
double lashed everything went through our life raft drill attached
lifelines donned oilskins and life jackets and waited 
the first indication of impending disaster came at about
 p m with an ominous silence the wind dropped and the sky
immediately grew dark then came a growing roar and an enormous
cloud towered aft of the ship with horror i realised that it was not a
cloud but a wave like no other i had ever seen it appeared perfectly
vertical and almost twice the height of the other waves with a frightful
breaking crest 
the roar increased to a thunder as the stern moved up the face of
the wave and for a moment i thought we might ride over it but then
a tremendous explosion shook the deck a torrent of green and white
water broke over the ship my head smashed into the wheel and i was
aware of flying overboard and sinking below the waves i accepted my
approaching death and as i was losing consciousness i felt quite
peaceful 
unexpectedly my head popped out of the water a few metres
away wavewalker was near capsizing her masts almost horizontal 
then a wave hurled her upright my lifeline jerked taut i grabbed
the guard rails and sailed through the air into wavewalker s main
boom subsequent waves tossed me around the deck like a rag doll 
my left ribs cracked my mouth filled with blood and broken teeth 
somehow i found the wheel lined up the stern for the next wave
and hung on 
water water everywhere i could feel that the ship had water
below but i dared not abandon the wheel to investigate suddenly 
the front hatch was thrown open and mary appeared we re sinking 
she screamed the decks are smashed we re full of water 
 take the wheel i shouted as i scrambled for the hatch 
reprint 
 hornbill
larry and herb were pumping like madmen broken timbers hung at
crazy angles the whole starboard side bulged inwards clothes crockery 
charts tins and toys sloshed about in deep water 
i half swam half crawled into the children s cabin are you all
right i asked yes they answered from an upper bunk but my
head hurts a bit said sue pointing to a big bump above her eyes i
had no time to worry about bumped heads 
after finding a hammer screws and canvas i struggled back on
deck with the starboard side bashed open we were taking water
with each wave that broke over us if i couldn t make some repairs 
we would surely sink 
somehow i managed to stretch canvas and secure waterproof hatch
covers across the gaping holes some water continued to stream below 
but most of it was now being deflected over the side 
more problems arose when our hand pumps started to block up
with the debris floating around the cabins and the electric pump shortcircuited the water level rose threateningly back on deck i found that
our two spare hand pumps had been wrenched overboard along with
the forestay sail the jib the dinghies and the main anchor 
then i remembered we had another electric pump under the
chartroom floor i connected it to an out pipe and was thankful to
find that it worked 
the night dragged on with an endless bitterly cold routine of
pumping steering and working the radio we were getting no replies
to our mayday calls which was not surprising in this remote corner
of the world 
sue s head had swollen alarmingly she had two enormous black
eyes and now she showed us a deep cut on her arm when i asked
why she hadn t made more of her injuries before this she replied i
didn t want to worry you when you were trying to save us all 
 
by morning on january the pumps had the water level sufficiently
under control for us to take two hours rest in rotation but we still had
a tremendous leak somewhere below the waterline and on checking 
i found that nearly all the boat s main rib frames were smashed down
to the keel in fact there was nothing holding up a whole section of
the starboard hull except a few cupboard partitions 
we had survived for hours since the wave hit but wavewalker
wouldn t hold together long enough for us to reach australia i checked
reprint 
we re not afraid to die 
our charts and calculated that there were two small islands a few
hundred kilometres to the east one of them ile amsterdam was a
french scientific base our only hope was to reach these pinpricks
in the vast ocean but unless the wind and seas abated so we could
hoist sail our chances would be slim indeed the great wave had put
our auxilliary engine out of action 
on january after hours of continuous pumping we reached
the last few centimetres of water now we had only to keep pace with
the water still coming in we could not set any sail on the main mast 
pressure on the rigging would simply pull the damaged section of the
hull apart so we hoisted the storm jib and headed for where i thought
the two islands were mary found some corned beef and cracker
biscuits and we ate our first meal in almost two days 
but our respite was short lived at p m black clouds began
building up behind us within the hour the wind was back to knots
and the seas were getting higher the weather continued to deteriorate
throughout the night and by dawn on january our situation was
again desperate 
when i went in to comfort the children jon asked daddy are we
going to die i tried to assure him that we could make it but daddy 
he went on we aren t afraid of dying if we can all be together you
and mummy sue and i 
i could find no words with which to respond but i left the
children s cabin determined to fight the sea with everything i had 
to protect the weakened starboard side i decided to heave to 
with the undamaged port hull facing the oncoming waves using an
improvised sea anchor of heavy nylon rope and two litre plastic
barrels of paraffin 
that evening mary and i sat together holding hands as the motion of
the ship brought more and more water in through the broken planks we
both felt the end was very near 
but wavewalker rode out the storm and by the morning of january
 with the wind easing i tried to get a reading on the sextant back in
the chartroom i worked on wind speeds changes of course drift and
current in an effort to calculate our position the best i could determine
was that we were somewhere in kilometres of ocean looking
for a kilometre wide island 
while i was thinking sue moving painfully joined me the left side
of her head was now very swollen and her blackened eyes narrowed
to slits she gave me a card she had made 
reprint 
 hornbill
on the front she had drawn caricatures of mary and me with the
words here are some funny people did they make you laugh i
laughed a lot as well inside was a message oh how i love you both 
so this card is to say thank you and let s hope for the best somehow
we had to make it 
 
i checked and rechecked my calculations we had lost our main
compass and i was using a spare which had not been corrected for
magnetic variation i made an allowance for this and another estimate
of the influence of the westerly currents which flow through this part
of the indian ocean 
about p m i went on deck and asked larry to steer a course of
 degrees if we were lucky i told him with a conviction i did not
feel he could expect to see the island at about p m 
then with a heavy heart i went below climbed on my bunk and
amazingly dozed off when i woke it was p m and growing dark i
knew we must have missed the island and with the sail we had left we
couldn t hope to beat back into the westerly winds 
at that moment a tousled head appeared by my bunk can i have
a hug jonathan asked sue was right behind him 
 why am i getting a hug now i asked 
 because you are the best daddy in the whole world and the best
captain my son replied 
 not today jon i m afraid 
 why you must be said sue in a matter of fact voice you found
the island 
 what i shouted 
 it s out there in front of us they chorused as big as a battleship 
i rushed on deck and gazed with relief at the stark outline of ile
amsterdam it was only a bleak piece of volcanic rock with little
vegetation the most beautiful island in the world 
we anchored offshore for the night and the next morning all 
inhabitants of the island cheered as they helped us ashore 
with land under my feet again my thoughts were full of larry
and herbie cheerful and optimistic under the direst stress and of
mary who stayed at the wheel for all those crucial hours most of all 
i thought of a seven year old girl who did not want us to worry about
reprint 
we re not afraid to die 
a head injury which subsequently took six minor operations to remove
a recurring blood clot between skin and skull and of a six year old
boy who was not afraid to die 
understanding the text
 list the steps taken by the captain
 i to protect the ship when rough weather began 
 ii to check the flooding of the water in the ship 
 describe the mental condition of the voyagers on and january 
 describe the shifts in the narration of the events as indicated in the three
sections of the text give a subtitle to each section 
talking about the text
discuss the following questions with your partner 
 what difference did you notice between the reaction of the adults and the
children when faced with danger 
 how does the story suggest that optimism helps to endure the direst
stress 
 what lessons do we learn from such hazardous experiences when we are
face to face with death 
 why do you think people undertake such adventurous expeditions in spite
of the risks involved 
thinking about language
 we have come across words like gale and storm in the account here
are two more words for storm typhoon cyclone how many words does
your language have for storm 
 here are the terms for different kinds of vessels yacht boat canoe ship 
steamer schooner think of similar terms in your language 
 catamaran is a kind of a boat do you know which indian language this
word is derived from check the dictionary 
reprint 
 hornbill
 have you heard any boatmen s songs what kind of emotions do these
songs usually express 
working with words
 the following words used in the text as ship terminology are also commonly
used in another sense in what contexts would you use the other meaning 
 knot stern boom hatch anchor
 the following three compound words end in ship what does each of them
mean 
airship flagship lightship
 the following are the meanings listed in the dictionary against the phrase
 take on in which meaning is it used in the third paragraph of the account 
take on sth to begin to have a particular quality or appearance 
to assume sth
take sb on to employ sb to engage sb
 to accept sb as one s opponent in a game contest or
conflict
take sb sth on to decide to do sth to allow sth sb to enter e g a
bus plane or ship to take sth sb on board
things to do
 given on the next page is a picture of a yacht label the parts of the yacht
using the terms given in the box 
bow cabin rudder cockpit
stern boom mainsail mast
reprint 
we re not afraid to die 
 here is some information downloaded from the internet on ile amsterdam 
you can view images of the isle if you go online 
location south indian ocean between
southernmost parts of australia
and south africa
latitude and longitude s e
sovereignty france
political status notes part of french southern and
antarctic lands
population 
census notes meteorological station staff
land area in square
kilometres
 
 locate ile amsterdam on the world map 
reprint 
 hornbill
this is a first person account of an adventurous ordeal that a family
experiences 
understanding the text
this section deals with factual and global comprehension practice is given
in describing and noticing text organisation 
talking about the text
peer interaction about subjective responses to the text empathy with and
comment on universal experiences and human behaviour related to risktaking and adventure 
thinking about language
 discovering tut the saga continues
a r williams
notice these expressions in the text 
infer their meaning from the context 
 forensic reconstruction funerary treasures
 scudded across circumvented
 casket grey computed tomography
 resurrection eerie detail
he was just a teenager when he
died the last heir of a powerful
family that had ruled egypt
and its empire for centuries 
he was laid to rest laden with
gold and eventually forgotten 
since the discovery of his tomb
in the modern world has
speculated about what happened
to him with murder being the
most extreme possibility now 
leaving his tomb for the first
time in almost years tut
has undergone a ct scan that
offers new clues about his life and
death and provides precise
data for an accurate forensic
reconstruction of the boyish
pharaoh 
reprint 
 hornbill
an angry wind stirred up ghostly dust devils as king tut was taken
from his resting place in the ancient egyptian cemetery known as
the valley of the kings dark bellied clouds had scudded across the
desert sky all day and now were veiling the stars in casket grey it
was p m on january the world s most famous mummy
glided head first into a ct scanner brought here to probe the lingering
medical mysteries of this little understood young ruler who died more
than years ago 
all afternoon the usual line of tourists from around the world had
descended into the cramped rock cut tomb some feet underground
to pay their respects they gazed at the murals on the walls of the burial
chamber and peered at tut s gilded face the most striking feature of his
mummy shaped outer coffin lid some visitors read from guidebooks in a
whisper others stood silently perhaps pondering tut s untimely death in
his late teens or wondering with a shiver if the pharaoh s curse death
or misfortune falling upon those who disturbed him was really true 
 the mummy is in very bad condition because of what carter did in
the s said zahi hawass secretary general of egypt s supreme
council of antiquities as he leaned over the body for a long first look 
carter howard carter that is was the british archaeologist who in
 discovered tut s tomb after years of futile searching its contents 
though hastily ransacked in antiquity were surprisingly complete 
they remain the richest royal collection ever found and have become
part of the pharaoh s legend stunning artefacts in gold their eternal
brilliance meant to guarantee resurrection caused a sensation at
the time of the discovery and still get the most attention but tut
was also buried with everyday things he d want in the afterlife board
games a bronze razor linen undergarments cases of food and wine 
after months of carefully recording the pharaoh s funerary
treasures carter began investigating his three nested coffins opening
the first he found a shroud adorned with garlands of willow and olive
leaves wild celery lotus petals and cornflowers the faded evidence
of a burial in march or april when he finally reached the mummy 
though he ran into trouble the ritual resins had hardened cementing
tut to the bottom of his solid gold coffin no amount of legitimate
force could move them carter wrote later what was to be done 
the sun can beat down like a hammer this far south in egypt and
carter tried to use it to loosen the resins for several hours he set
the mummy outside in blazing sunshine that heated it to degrees
 see map on next page
reprint 
discovering tut the saga continues 
 map not to scale 
africa
asia
river
egypt nile
reprint 
 hornbill
fahrenheit nothing budged he reported with scientific detachment
that the consolidated material had to be chiselled away from beneath
the limbs and trunk before it was possible to raise the king s remains 
in his defence carter really had little choice if he hadn t
cut the mummy free thieves most certainly would have
circumvented the guards and ripped it apart to remove the
gold in tut s time the royals were fabulously wealthy and they
thought or hoped they could take their riches with them for
his journey to the great beyond king tut was lavished with glittering
goods precious collars inlaid necklaces and bracelets rings amulets 
a ceremonial apron sandals sheaths for his fingers and toes and
the now iconic inner coffin and mask all of pure gold to separate
tut from his adornments carter s men removed the mummy s head
and severed nearly every major joint once they had finished they
reassembled the remains on a layer of sand in a wooden box with
padding that concealed the damage the bed where tut now rests 
archaeology has changed substantially in the intervening
decades focusing less on treasure and more on the fascinating
details of life and intriguing mysteries of death it also uses more
sophisticated tools including medical technology in more
than years after carter s discovery an anatomy professor
x rayed the mummy and revealed a startling fact beneath the resin that
cakes his chest his breast bone and front ribs are missing 
today diagnostic imaging can be done with computed tomography 
or ct by which hundreds of x rays in cross section are put together
like slices of bread to create a three dimensional virtual body what
more would a ct scan reveal of tut than the x ray and could it answer
two of the biggest questions still lingering about him how did he
die and how old was he at the time of his death 
king tut s demise was a big event even by royal standards he
was the last of his family s line and his funeral was the death rattle of
a dynasty but the particulars of his passing away and its aftermath
are unclear 
amenhotep iii tut s father or grandfather was a powerful
pharaoh who ruled for almost four decades at the height of the
eighteenth dynasty s golden age his son amenhotep iv succeeded
him and initiated one of the strangest periods in the history of ancient
egypt the new pharaoh promoted the worship of the aten the sun
disk changed his name to akhenaten or servant of the aten and
moved the religious capital from the old city of thebes to the new city
of akhetaten known now as amarna he further shocked the country
reprint 
discovering tut the saga continues 
by attacking amun a major god smashing his images and closing
his temples it must have been a horrific time said ray johnson 
director of the university of chicago s research centre in luxor the
site of ancient thebes the family that had ruled for centuries was
coming to an end and then akhenaten went a little wacky 
after akhenaten s death a mysterious ruler named smenkhkare
appeared briefly and exited with hardly a trace and then a very young
tutankhaten took the throne king tut as he s widely known today 
the boy king soon changed his name to tutankhamun living image
of amun and oversaw a restoration of the old ways he reigned for
about nine years and then died unexpectedly 
regardless of his fame and the speculations about his fate tut is one
mummy among many in egypt how many no one knows the egyptian
mummy project which began an inventory in late has recorded almost
 so far and is still counting the next phase scanning the mummies
with a portable ct machine donated by the national geographic society
and siemens its manufacturer king tut is one of the first mummies to be
scanned in death as in life moving regally ahead of his countrymen 
a ct machine scanned the mummy head to toe creating 
digital x ray images in cross section tut s head scanned in 
millimetre slices to register its intricate structures takes on eerie
detail in the resulting image with tut s entire body similarly recorded 
a team of specialists in radiology forensics and anatomy began to
probe the secrets that the winged goddesses of a gilded burial shrine
protected for so long 
the night of the scan workmen carried tut from the tomb in
his box like pallbearers they climbed a ramp and a flight of stairs
into the swirling sand outside then rose on a hydraulic lift into the
trailer that held the scanner twenty minutes later two men emerged 
sprinted for an office nearby and returned with a pair of white plastic
fans the million dollar scanner had quit because of sand in a cooler
fan curse of the pharaoh joked a guard nervously 
eventually the substitute fans worked well enough to finish the
procedure after checking that no data had been lost the technicians
turned tut over to the workmen who carried him back to his tomb 
less than three hours after he was removed from his coffin the
pharaoh again rested in peace where the funerary priests had laid
him so long ago 
back in the trailer a technician pulled up astonishing images of
tut on a computer screen a grey head took shape from a scattering
reprint 
 hornbill
of pixels and the technician spun and tilted it in every direction neck
vertebrae appeared as clearly as in an anatomy class other images
revealed a hand several views of the rib cage and a transection of
the skull but for now the pressure was off sitting back in his chair 
zahi hawass smiled visibly relieved that nothing had gone seriously
wrong i didn t sleep last night not for a second he said i was so
worried but now i think i will go and sleep 
mural in king tut s tomb showing king
tut with osiris the god of the afterlife
by the time we left the trailer descending metal stairs to the sandy
ground the wind had stopped the winter air lay cold and still like
death itself in this valley of the departed just above the entrance to
tut s tomb stood orion the constellation that the ancient egyptians
knew as the soul of osiris the god of the afterlife watching over
the boy king 
 source national geographic vol no 
reprint 
discovering tut the saga continues 
understanding the text
 give reasons for the following 
 i king tut s body has been subjected to repeated scrutiny 
 ii howard carter s investigation was resented 
 iii carter had to chisel away the solidified resins to raise the king s
remains 
 iv tut s body was buried along with gilded treasures 
 v the boy king changed his name from tutankhaten to tutankhamun 
 i list the deeds that led ray johnson to describe akhenaten as wacky 
 ii what were the results of the ct scan 
 iii list the advances in technology that have improved forensic analysis 
 iv explain the statement king tut is one of the first mummies to be
scanned in death as in life 
talking about the text
discuss the following in groups of two pairs each pair in a group taking
opposite points of view 
 scientific intervention is necessary to unearth buried mysteries 
 advanced technology gives us conclusive evidence of past events 
 traditions rituals and funerary practices must be respected 
 knowledge about the past is useful to complete our knowledge of the world
we live in 
thinking about language
 read the following piece of information from the encyclopedia of language
by david crystal 
egyptian is now extinct its history dates from before the third
millennium b c preserved in many hieroglyphic inscriptions and
papyrus manuscripts around the second century a d it developed into
a language known as coptic coptic may still have been used as late
as the early nineteenth century and is still used as a religious language
by monophysite christians in egypt 
 what do you think are the reasons for the extinction of languages 
 do you think it is important to preserve languages 
 in what ways do you think we could help prevent the extinction of languages
and dialects 
reprint 
 hornbill
working with words
 given below are some interesting combinations of words explain why they
have been used together 
 i ghostly dust devils vi dark bellied clouds
 ii desert sky vii casket grey
 iii stunning artefacts viii eternal brilliance
 iv funerary treasures ix ritual resins
 v scientific detachment x virtual body
 here are some commonly used medical terms find out their meanings 
ct scan mri tomography
autopsy dialysis ecg
post mortem angiography biopsy
things to do
 the constellation orion is associated with the legend of osiris the god of
the afterlife 
find out the astronomical descriptions and legends associated with the
following 
 i ursa major saptarishi mandala 
 ii polaris dhruva tara 
 iii pegasus winged horse 
 iv sirius dog star 
 v gemini mithuna 
 some of the leaves and flowers mentioned in the passage for adorning
the dead are willow olive celery lotus cornflower which of these are
common in our country 
 name some leaves and flowers that are used as adornments in our country 
reprint 
discovering tut the saga continues 
notes
understanding the text
factual comprehension giving reasons listing
talking about the text
debate on issues raised in the text related to rediscovering history with the
help of technology respect for traditions reflection on issues 
thinking about language
extinction of language and language preservation
working with words
understanding adjectival collocations common medical terms
things to do
relating astronomical facts and legends across the curriculum 
finding out botanical correlates
reprint 
the laburnum top
ted hughes
the laburnum top is silent quite still
in the afternoon yellow september sunlight 
a few leaves yellowing all its seeds fallen 
till the goldfinch comes with a twitching chirrup
a suddenness a startlement at a branch end 
then sleek as a lizard and alert and abrupt 
she enters the thickness and a machine starts up
of chitterings and a tremor of wings and trillings 
the whole tree trembles and thrills 
it is the engine of her family 
she stokes it full then flirts out to a branch end
showing her barred face identity mask
then with eerie delicate whistle chirrup whisperings
she launches away towards the infinite
and the laburnum subsides to empty 
laburnum a short tree with hanging branches yellow flowers and
poisonous seeds
goldfinch a small singing bird with yellow feathers on its wings
reprint 
the laburnum top 
find out
 what laburnum is called in your language 
 which local bird is like the goldfinch 
think it out
 what do you notice about the beginning and the ending of the poem 
 to what is the bird s movement compared what is the basis for the
comparison 
 why is the image of the engine evoked by the poet 
 what do you like most about the poem 
 what does the phrase her barred face identity mask mean 
note down
 the sound words
 the movement words
 the dominant colour in the poem 
list the following
 words which describe sleek alert and abrupt 
 words with the sound ch as in chart and tr as in trembles in the poem 
 other sounds that occur frequently in the poem 
thinking about language
look for some other poem on a bird or a tree in english or any other language 
try this out
write four lines in verse form on any tree that you see around you 
reprint 
 hornbill
notes
this poem has been placed after a text which has references to names of
plants for thematic sequencing 
understanding the poem
 glossing of laburnum and goldfinch 

 factual understanding
 movement of thought and structuring poetic sensitivity 
 focus on figures of speech and imagery used poetic sensitivity 
 attention to sounds lexical collocations poetic sensitivity 
thinking about language
 finding equivalents in other languages multilingualism 
 relating to thematically similar poems in other languages multilingualism 
 attempt at creativity
reprint 
the voice of the rain
walt whitman
and who art thou said i to the soft falling shower 
which strange to tell gave me an answer as here translated 
i am the poem of earth said the voice of the rain 
eternal i rise impalpable out of the land and the bottomless sea 
upward to heaven whence vaguely form d altogether changed 
and yet the same 
i descend to lave the droughts atomies dust layers of the globe 
and all that in them without me were seeds only latent unborn 
and forever by day and night i give back life to my own origin 
and make pure and beautify it 
 for song issuing from its birth place after fulfilment wandering
reck d or unreck d duly with love returns 
impalpable something that cannot be touched
lave wash bathe
atomies tiny particles
latent hidden
reprint 
 hornbill
think it out
i there are two voices in the poem who do they belong to which lines
indicate this 
 what does the phrase strange to tell mean 
 there is a parallel drawn between rain and music which words indicate
this explain the similarity between the two 
 how is the cyclic movement of rain brought out in the poem compare
it with what you have learnt in science 
 why are the last two lines put within brackets 
 list the pairs of opposites found in the poem 
ii notice the following sentence patterns 
 and who art thou said i to the soft falling shower 
 i am the poem of earth said the voice of the rain 
 eternal i rise
 for song duly with love returns
 rewrite the above sentences in prose 
iii look for some more poems on the rain and see how this one is different
from them 
notes
this is a nature poem celebrating the coming of the rain 
understanding the poem
 sense of the poem
 relating to the process of rainfall scientifically across the curriculum 
 noticing sentence structure in poems
 voices in the poem
 comparison with other rain poems

text


stringlengths
54797976.5%
Once there was a little boy named Jack. He was only three years old and had lots of things he wanted to do. One day he saw something very special in the park - a big wheel! It was big and bright and looked very inviting. Jack wanted to get on the wheel, so he ran to it. He put his hands on it and gently started turning it around. The wheel spun faster and he laughed as he felt the wind blowing in his face. Once the wheel slowed down, Jack got off and looked around. He had such a great time on the wheel. He put his hands back on it and started turning it again, and soon he was spinning faster and faster. Every time he got off the wheel, he would put his hands back on it and start turning it again! The more Jack put his hands on this big, bright wheel and gently turned it, the more he loved it. It was so much fun and he would happily keep turning it every day after that.
One day, Tom and Sue went to the park. They wanted to play a game. Tom said, "Let's tie our shoes and race to the big tree!" Sue said, "Ok, let's go!" They tied their shoes and ran as fast as they could. Tom got to the tree first. He saw a hidden box. He called Sue, "Look, a hidden box! Let's open it!" When they opened the box, they found lots of jam. They were surprised! They took the jam and shared it with their friends at the park. Everyone was happy and had a great time.
Lily loved her panda toy very much. She hugged it every night and played with it every day. She named it Pandy and gave it a red bow. Pandy was her best friend. One day, Lily's mom said they had to move to a new house. She said they had to sell some of their things to get money. She said Lily had to sell some of her toys too. Lily was very sad. She did not want to sell Pandy. She hid Pandy under her bed and hoped her mom would not find it. But her mom did. She took Pandy out and put it in a big box with other toys. She said she was sorry, but they had to sell Pandy. Lily cried and begged her mom to let her keep Pandy. But her mom said no. The next day, a man came to buy the toys. He saw Pandy in the box and liked it. He said he would give five dollars for it. Lily's mom said yes and gave him Pandy. Lily ran after him and screamed, "No, no, give me back Pandy!" But the man did not hear her. He got in his car and drove away. Lily fell on the ground and sobbed. She had lost her best friend. She wished she could see Pandy again. But she never did. The man who bought Pandy did not care for it. He threw it in the trash. Pandy was dirty and torn. He had no bow and no friend. He was dead.
Once upon a time, in a small town, there was a kind girl named Lily. One day, she went for a walk in the fog. The fog was very thick, so she could not see very far. As Lily walked, she heard a small voice. "Help!" said the voice. Lily looked around and saw a tiny bird. The bird was stuck in a cage. "Please help me unlock the cage," the bird asked. Lily wanted to help the bird. She found a small key and used it to unlock the cage. The bird was very happy. "Thank you, kind girl!" said the bird. They became good friends and played together in the fog.
Once upon a time, there was a little yellow duck. The duck lived in a bathroom. The bathroom was very big for the duck. The duck liked to play in the water. One day, the duck saw a toy boat. The boat was stuck in the water. The duck wanted to help the boat. The duck said, "I will help you, boat!" The duck tried to push the boat, but it was a struggle. The duck pushed and pushed, but the boat did not move. Then, the duck had an idea. The duck asked a friend, a little green frog, to help. The frog lived in the bathroom too. The frog said, "Yes, I will help you, duck!" The duck and the frog pushed the boat together. The boat moved and was not stuck anymore. The duck and the frog were happy. They played with the boat all day.
One day, a famous cat named Tom went to the park. He saw a little girl named Sue. Sue had a pretty cup with her. Tom wanted to show Sue a fun game with the cup. Tom said to Sue, "Hi Sue! Can I show you a fun game with your cup?" Sue smiled and said, "Yes, Tom! I like fun games." Tom was happy to show Sue the game. He knew she would love it. Tom put the cup on the ground and hid a small ball under it. He moved the cup around and asked Sue to find the ball. Sue found the ball and laughed. She loved the game Tom showed her. They played the game all day and became good friends.
Once upon a time, there was a nice robot named Robby. Robby lived in a small house near a big pond. Every day, he went to the pond to play with his friends, the ducks. One sunny day, Robby and the ducks were playing near the water. They took turns to splash in the pond. "Splash, splash!" said Robby. "Quack, quack!" said the ducks. They all laughed and had fun together. A little duck named Ducky was scared to splash in the water. Robby saw this and went to help. "Don't be scared, Ducky. I will help you," said Robby. He held Ducky's wing and they splashed together. Ducky was happy and thanked Robby. The other ducks clapped and cheered for Ducky and Robby. From that day on, Ducky was not scared to splash in the water anymore. The moral of the story is to always help your friends when they are scared or need help.
Once upon a time, there was a child named Tim. Tim had a big, empty box. He wanted to make something fun with it. So, he thought and thought about what to make. One day, Tim's friend, Sue, came over to play. "What are you doing, Tim?" Sue asked. "I want to make something fun with this empty box," Tim said. "Let's make a fort!" Sue said with a big smile. Tim liked the idea. Tim and Sue worked together to make the fort. They put the empty box on the floor and put a big blanket over it. They crawled inside and laughed. "This is the best fort ever!" Tim said. Sue agreed. They played in their fort all day long, happy with the fun they made.
Once upon a time, there was a clever dog named Spot. Spot had a big tooth. One day, Spot went for a walk in the park. He saw many trees, flowers, and birds. The sun was shining, and it was a beautiful day. As Spot walked, he noticed a little girl crying by a tree. The girl had lost her ball. Spot wanted to help the girl. He looked around and saw the ball stuck high up in the tree. Spot used his big tooth to grab the ball. He jumped and pulled the ball down from the tree. The little girl was very happy. She hugged Spot and said, "Thank you, clever dog!" Spot wagged his tail and smiled. He was happy to help his new friend. And from that day on, Spot and the little girl played together in the park every day.
Once upon a time, there was a little girl named Sue. Sue loved to play with her ball. One day, she played with her ball in the park. She would throw it high and try to catch it. But sometimes, she would miss the ball and it would fall on the dry grass. Sue had a friend named Tom. Tom liked to play with Sue and her ball. They would take turns throwing the ball and saying a fun word when they catch it. Sue would say "happy" and Tom would say "jump". They laughed and played all day. One day, Tom was not at the park. Sue felt sad and missed her friend. She played with her ball alone, but it was not as fun without Tom. The next day, Tom came back to the park. Sue was so happy to see him. They played with the ball and said their fun words again. Sue did not miss Tom anymore, and they played together on the dry grass every day.
Once upon a time, there was a little girl named Amy. She had a birdcage with a pretty bird inside. One day, it was very icy outside. Amy wanted to cook a warm meal for her family. She asked her mom, "Can I help cook?" Her mom said, "Yes, but be careful near the stove." Amy was so happy to help. She cooked and cooked, but she forgot about her pretty bird in the birdcage. As Amy cooked, the birdcage got too hot. The pretty bird inside the birdcage got very hot too. The bird tried to fly away, but it could not. The birdcage door was closed. Amy smelled something bad. She saw the birdcage near the stove. She cried and cried. The pretty bird was gone. Amy was very sad. She learned to be more careful when she cooked.
Once upon a time, there was a big, hairy dog named Bobo. Bobo lived in a small house with his friend, a little girl named Lily. One day, Bobo and Lily found a shiny gold rock in their backyard. The gold rock had a magic glow. They were very happy to find the rock. Bobo said to Lily, "Let's hide the gold rock so no one can take it." Lily agreed, and they hid the rock under Bobo's bed. But the gold rock's glow was so bright that it shone through the night. People saw the light and came to their house, asking about the glow. Lily and Bobo decided to share the gold rock with everyone. People came from all around to see the glow. Everyone was happy and became friends. Lily said, "Sharing makes everyone happy!" And from that day on, Lily and Bobo always shared their things with others. The moral of the story is that sharing brings happiness to everyone.
Once upon a time there was a tomato. The tomato was ready to rot. One day it said hello to its friends, a carrot and a cabbage. The tomato said to its friends, "Let's start an adventure. It'll be so fun!" The carrot said, "That sounds funny. But where will we go?" The tomato thought for a moment, then said, "Let's go to the beach!" So, the three friends started their adventure. They raced over the sand, jumping and dancing. They felt so happy and free. Soon, the sun began to set and the three friends knew it was time to go home. They hugged goodbye, and the tomato said, "Let's come back soon and start a new adventure!" The carrot and the cabbage agreed and they all waved goodbye until they were out of sight. The tomato knew that it had one more adventure before it was ready to rot.
One day, a little boy named Tim wanted to have a party. He was very excited. He asked his mom if he could invite his friends. His mom said yes, it would be easy to have a party. Tim and his mom went to the store to buy things for the party. They bought hats, balloons, and a big cake. When they got home, they had to unpack the bags. Tim found a big box inside one of the bags. He did not know what was in the box. At the party, Tim and his friends played games. They laughed and had fun. But then, Tim's little sister, Sue, wanted to open the big box. Tim said no, but Sue did not listen. She opened the box and lots of little balls came out. The balls went everywhere! Tim was mad at Sue, but then he saw that his friends were having fun with the balls. They played a new game with the balls. The party was still fun, and Tim was not mad anymore. In the end, everyone had a great time at the party.
Once upon a time, there was a boy named Mark. Mark lived in a house near a big park. He liked to play in the park with his friends. One day, Mark saw a wild bird in the park. The bird was very pretty with many colors. Mark wanted to watch the bird fly and play. So, he sat on the grass and looked at the bird. The wild bird saw Mark watching and came closer. Mark was very happy. He and the bird played together in the park all day. The bird became Mark's new friend. They had lots of fun together.
One day, a little boy named Tim looked up at the sky. He saw the big, bright moon. He had a question. "Why is the moon so big?" he asked his mom. His mom smiled and said, "The moon is not always big. It changes." The next day, Tim saw the moon again. It was not as big as before. He found it difficult to understand. He asked his mom, "Why did the moon change?" His mom told him, "The moon has different shapes. It will grow big and then small again." On the third day, Tim watched the moon. It was very small now. He remembered what his mom said. The moon would grow big and then small again. He was happy he knew the answer to his question. Tim smiled and said, "I understand the moon now, Mom!"
One day, Sam's parents mentioned a parade. Sam jumped up and down with excitement. He had never seen a parade before and it sounded interesting. On the day of the parade, Sam's family said goodbye and headed downtown. The buildings were tall, but Sam only had eyes for the parade. Sam saw lots of colorful and interesting things. There were clowns, jugglers, and musicians. The floats were decorated with balloons and flowers. Everyone was happy and waving. Sam noticed that even the animals were part of the parade. At the end of the parade, Sam was sad, but happy he had been able to see all the interesting things. He knew he would never forget his first parade.
Once upon a time, there was a little girl named Lily. She loved to play outside in her clean, green garden. One day, she found a maze in the garden. Lily was very happy. Lily went into the maze. She walked and walked. She saw pretty flowers and little bugs. She kept walking and found a big, clean pond. Lily loved the pond very much. Then, Lily found her way out of the maze. She went home and told her mommy and daddy about the maze and the pond. They all went back to the maze to play together. They had lots of fun and Lily felt so much love.
Once upon a time, there was a little girl named Lucy. She loved to help her mom in the kitchen. One day, Lucy's mom gave her a pretty apron to wear. Lucy was very happy and put on the apron right away. Lucy and her mom were going to make a cake. Lucy's mom said, "Lucy, you can spray the pan with oil so the cake won't stick." Lucy was excited to help. She picked up the spray bottle and sprayed the pan. It was easy and fun! When the cake was done, Lucy and her mom shared it with the family. Everyone loved the cake and said, "Thank you, Lucy, for helping!" Lucy felt proud and happy. The moral of the story is that helping others can be easy and fun, and it makes everyone feel good.
Once upon a time, there was a big tree in the forest. It had big branches and lots of leaves. One day, a woodworker had a great idea. He took out his saw and started to work. He worked hard, cutting down the tree. He was going to make a beautiful bench. But while he was sawing, the tree made a loud noise. Suddenly, some little birds flew out of the tree. The woodworker was sorry he spoiled the birds' home. He wanted to make them a new one. So he worked even harder on the bench. When he finished, the woodworker proudly stepped back to admire his work. He had created the perfect new home for the birds. They all flew in and found a safe and cozy place to stay.
Lily wanted to play with her friend Max, who lived next door. She asked her mom if she could go to his house. Her mom looked at the calendar on the wall and said, "Not today, Lily. Max is not available. He has a doctor's appointment." Lily felt sad and said, "But I want to play with Max. He is my best friend. Can I go tomorrow?" Her mom replied, "Maybe, if he is feeling better. But you have to wait and see. Why don't you play with your toys or read a book?" Lily did not want to play with her toys or read a book. She wanted to play with Max. She decided to sneak out of the house and go to his house anyway. She put on her shoes and coat and opened the door. But as soon as she stepped outside, she saw a big dog running towards her. The dog was angry and barked loudly. Lily was scared and tried to run back inside, but the dog was faster. The dog bit her leg and made her fall down. Lily screamed and cried. Her mom heard her and came outside. She saw the dog and Lily and shouted for help. She picked up Lily and took her inside. She called the doctor and said, "My daughter has been bitten by a dog. She needs help. Please come quickly." She hugged Lily and said, "I'm sorry, Lily. I should have watched you better. You should have listened to me. Now you are hurt and in pain." Lily felt sorry too. She wished she had listened to her mom. She wished she had not gone to Max's house. She wished the dog had not bitten her. She wished she could play with Max. But she could not. She had to go to the doctor and get a shot. She had to stay in bed and rest. She had to wait for her leg to heal. She had a bad day. She learned a hard lesson.
One day, a big bear and a small rabbit were friends. They wanted to play. The big bear said, "Let's go to the icy land to play!" The small rabbit was scared. He did not like the cold. They went to the icy land. The big bear was happy. The small rabbit was cold and sad. The big bear saw the small rabbit was not happy. He said, "What can we do to make you happy?" The small rabbit thought for a moment. He said, "I have an idea! Let's suggest a new game to play. We can play in the warm sun!" The big bear agreed. They went back to the warm sun and played all day. The small rabbit was happy again.
Once upon a time, in a small village, there was an ancient well. The well had been there for many, many years. It would provide water for all the people and animals in the village. One day, a little boy named Tim went to the well. He wanted to get some water for his family. When he reached the well, he saw an old man standing there. The old man said, "Hello, Tim. Be careful with the water you take from this well." Tim didn't listen to the old man. He thought he knew better. He took a big bucket and filled it with water from the well. He carried the heavy bucket back to his house. When Tim got home, he gave the water to his family. They all drank the water, but soon, they all started to feel sick. The ancient well's water had made them ill. Tim realized he should have listened to the old man's warning.
One day, a little girl named Amy found a camera. She wanted to take a picture of her cat. Amy did not know how to use the camera, but she wanted to try. Amy tried to take the picture, but the camera did not work. She felt sorry for her cat because it was waiting for the picture. Amy asked her mom for help. Her mom showed Amy how to use the camera. They took a picture of the cat together. Amy was happy and said "thank you" to her mom. The cat was happy too.
Mindy was a little girl who liked to draw. Every day she would take out her journal and draw something new in it. She was so proud of the things she created, but her brother Paul didn't always appreciate her work. One day, Mindy was drawing in her journal when Paul came over and tried to take it away from her. "Give it to me!" he said. Mindy held on as tight as she could but Paul was too strong. He grabbed the journal that Mindy was so proud of and started to destroy it. Mindy was very angry and tried to grab it back. Even though she tried very hard, Paul was too fast. After a few moments, the journal was in pieces on the floor. Mindy started to cry. Paul felt bad and tried to apologize. "I'm sorry Mindy, I didn't mean to be so slow." he said. Mindy looked at Paul and told him that he didn't need to be sorry. She then hugged him and told him that it was OK. The two of them worked together to put the journal back together, and Mindy was once again able to draw her beautiful pictures. From that day on, Paul made sure to be extra careful when he was around Mindy's journal.
Once upon a time, there was a modest plane named Pete. Pete was not big, but he was very fast. Pete loved to fly in the sky and play with his friends. One day, Pete was flying high in the sky when he saw a big ball. He wanted to play catch with the ball. So, he flew down to the ground and asked the ball, "Do you want to play catch with me?" The ball said, "Yes, I would like to play catch with you, Pete!" Pete and the ball started to play catch. They were having so much fun. But then, the ball flew too high and too fast. Pete tried to catch the ball, but he could not. Pete went too high and too fast, too. He could not fly anymore and fell to the ground. Pete was very sad because he could not fly and play with his friends anymore.
Once upon a time, there was a little girl named Lily. Lily loved to dream. Every night, she would dream a new story. Her dreams were full of fun and happy things. One day, Lily told her mom about her dreams. "Mom, I had a dream about a big, heavy ball. We played with it, and it was so much fun!" Her mom smiled and said, "That sounds like a wonderful dream, Lily." The next day, Lily and her mom went to the park. They saw a big, heavy ball, just like in Lily's dream. They played with the ball all day, laughing and having fun. And from that day on, Lily's dreams became even more magical.
Once upon a time, there was a unique kid named Tim. He had a special power. He could disappear when he wanted to. Tim loved to play hide and seek with his friends. One day, Tim and his friends were playing in the park. They decided to play hide and seek. Tim thought it would be fun to disappear and hide. So, he used his power and disappeared. Tim's friends looked and looked for him, but they could not find him. They started to feel sad. They missed their friend Tim. Tim did not come back, and his friends never saw him again.
Once upon a time, there was a big dog named Max. Max loved to jog in the park with his friend, a little boy named Tim. They would jog and play all day long. One day, while they were jogging, a stupid cat jumped out from behind a tree. The cat said, "You can't catch me!" Max and Tim laughed and started to chase the cat. The cat ran and ran, but Max and Tim were fast, too. Finally, they caught the cat. The cat said, "Please don't hurt me!" Max looked at Tim and said, "We must protect the cat, not hurt it." So, they let the cat go, and they all became friends. From that day on, they would all jog and play together, and Max would always protect his friends.
One day, a child named Sam went to the park with his mom. He liked to play on the swings and the slide. He saw a big dog near the fence. He wanted to pet the dog, so he ran to it. But the dog was not friendly. It barked and growled at Sam. It showed its teeth and jumped on him. Sam was scared and hurt. He felt helpless. He cried and shouted, "Mom, help me!" His mom heard him and ran to him. She pushed the dog away and hugged Sam. She said, "It's okay, Sam. I'm here. You're safe." She checked his arms and legs for bites. She said, "We need to go to the doctor. The dog might have made you sick." Sam nodded and held his mom's hand. He was still shaking and crying. He said, "I'm sorry, mom. I just wanted to pet the dog. I didn't know it was bad." His mom said, "It's not your fault, Sam. Some dogs are not nice. You have to be careful and ask before you touch them. I love you, Sam. You're brave." She took him to the car and drove to the doctor. The doctor gave him a shot and a band-aid. He said, "You'll be fine, Sam. Just keep the wound clean and take this medicine. And don't forget to hug your mom. She saved you." Sam smiled and hugged his mom. He said, "Thank you, mom. You're the best." He learned a lesson that day. He never ran to a strange dog again. He always asked and listened to his mom. He was happy and safe.
Sara and Tom are playing in the park. They like to run and jump and slide. Sara has a net. She wants to catch some bugs. Tom has a ball. He wants to kick it and throw it. "Let's play with my net," Sara says. "We can find some ants and bees and butterflies." "No, let's play with my ball," Tom says. "We can score some goals and make some noise." They do not agree. They start to argue. They pull and tug at each other's toys. "Stop it, stop it!" a voice says. It is Mom. She is watching them from a bench. She is not happy. She walks over to them. "You two need to share and take turns," Mom says. "Or else you will have to go home." Sara and Tom do not want to go home. They want to play in the park. They look at each other. They nod. "OK, Mom," they say. "We will share and take turns." Mom smiles. She gives them a hug. She orders them to be nice and have fun. Sara and Tom play with the net and the ball. They take turns. They find some bugs and score some goals. They laugh and cheer. They have fun. But then, something happens. A big dog runs into the park. It sees the ball. It wants to play. It chases the ball. It grabs the ball. It runs away with the ball. Sara and Tom are shocked. They are sad. They want their ball back. "Hey, that's our ball!" they shout. They run after the dog. Mom sees them. She is worried. She calls them to come back. "Wait, wait!" she says. "Don't chase the dog. It might be dangerous." But Sara and Tom do not hear her. They are too far away. They only see the ball. They catch up with the dog. They try to get the ball. But the dog is strong. It does not let go. It growls and barks. Sara and Tom are scared. They back away. They wish they had listened to Mom. But then, Sara has an idea. She remembers her net. She still has it in her hand. She thinks of a plan. She whispers to Tom. She tells him her plan. He nods. He likes her plan. They act fast. They work together. Sara throws the net over the dog. Tom grabs the ball. They run away with the ball. The dog is confused. It is trapped. It cannot see. It cannot run. It whines and wails. Sara and Tom are happy. They have their ball back. They hug each other. They thank each other. They run back to Mom. They show her the ball. They tell her what happened. Mom is relieved. She is proud. She is glad they are safe. She hugs them. She praises them. She orders them to be careful. She also orders them to clean the ball. It is dirty and wet from the dog's mouth. Sara and Tom agree. They clean the ball. They make it shiny and bright. They play with the ball again. They also play with the net. They share and take turns. They have fun. They are happy. Mom is happy. The dog is not happy. But it is free. Someone comes and takes the net off. It runs away. It looks for another ball.
Martin was walking in the park one day. He noticed everything seemed very peaceful and smooth. But as he walked, he noticed something strange. The ground seemed to be trembling a bit. He told his mom about it, but she said it was nothing to worry about. So, Martin kept on walking. Soon, he heard a loud noise and he felt like he was sinking. He was scared, but he kept walking until he saw a pond that looked so beautiful, yet it was trembling and shuddering. Martin remembered suddenly what his mom had said earlier. He realized that the trembling he had felt earlier was a sign of the upcoming storm. He watched in awe as powerful waves moved across the smooth surface of the pond. Martin used this experience to remember to respect and cherish nature for its power and beauty. He also learned to pay attention to warning signs in order to stay safe.
Once upon a time, there was a poor dolphin that lived on the beach. He loved to play in the sand and swim in the warm ocean. Whenever it got too warm, he would jump out of the water to cool off. One day, the dolphin heard a loud noise coming from the sky. He looked up to see what was happening and saw a chunk of a ship falling from the sky. It landed in the ocean with a big splash. The dolphin was curious and swam towards the ship. As he got closer he could see that it was welcoming him. The ship had a friendly face painted on its side. It had big welcoming arms that kept the dolphin safe. The dolphin was excited and hopped onto the boat. He found a group of other dolphins who were just as poor as he was. They were all excited to welcome the poor dolphin to their new home. Together they all made a happy family and paddled away, off to explore the world.
Once upon a time, there was an enormous farm. On this farm, lived a special cow. This cow loved to lead her calf around, and everywhere she went, magical prints were left behind. Everywhere the cow and calf went, all the other animals could follow. One day the cow and her calf walked around the farm and came upon an enormous lake. They noticed the magical prints from the cow leading around the lake. Seeing the prints made them feel excited and adventurous. The cow and her calf decided to follow the prints until it lead them to a huge cliff. At the cliff, the team could see how enormous the world was! All of the farm animals felt amazed and inspired witnessing the huge view. From that day on, the cow and her calf have lead all the other animals around the farm and have taught them the power of exploration.
Once upon a time, there was a little boy named Tim. He loved to play on the beach. One day, he went to the beach with his mom and dad. He saw many pretty shells on the sand. He wanted to catch them all. Tim ran around the beach to catch the shells. He saw a big, naughty crab near a big shell. The crab was very fast. Tim wanted the big shell, but he was scared of the crab. Tim's dad saw him and came to help. He caught the naughty crab and moved it away. Tim was happy and picked up the big shell. He thanked his dad and they all went back home with a big smile.
One day, a little boy named Tim found a weird tool in his toy box. He did not know what it was for. He showed it to his friend, Sue. Sue looked at it and said, "I don't know what it is, but it looks funny!" Tim and Sue went to ask their friend, Dan, if he knew what the weird tool was for. Dan looked at it and laughed. "That's not a tool, it's a toy!" he said. Tim and Sue were confused. They did not know how to play with the toy. Dan showed them how to use the toy. They all took turns playing with it and laughing. They had so much fun, they forgot about their fight. They were happy to have a new toy to play with and share.
Once upon a time there was a small, furry animal called Splitty. Splitty was hairy, and loved to explore the world. On this particular day, Splitty had come across a place called the Forest of Touch. "What's this place?" asked Splitty. The forest was filled with strange plants and animals. Splitty was curious and ventured further in. Suddenly, Splitty felt something on his back. "Whoa!" Splitty jumped. When he looked, there was a big, hairy creature standing behind him. It was a giant green monster! The monster roared, and Splitty quickly ran away. He ran and ran, until he discovered a big tree. Splitty had an idea. He quickly split the tree in two. The vibrations from the tree shook the big monster, who fell down and couldn't get up. Splitty was safe! He rubbed his back and thanked the tree, before heading home.
One day, a tall girl named Lily went to yoga class. She liked yoga because it made her feel happy and strong. In the class, there were many kids who wanted to learn yoga too. The teacher said, "Today, we will learn to balance on one foot." All the kids tried to balance, but it was hard. Some kids fell down and started to laugh. Lily tried to balance too. She felt wobbly at first, but she kept trying. Finally, she could balance on one foot! She was so happy and said to her friend, "Look, I did it!" Her friend tried again and soon, she could balance too. They both smiled and had fun at yoga class.
Once upon a time, there was a little mouse named Tim. Tim was very adventurous. He liked to go to the park and play with his friends. One day, Tim heard about a big cheese that was in the park. He wanted to find it and share it with his friends. Tim went to the park and started to look for the cheese. He looked under the slide, behind the swings, and in the sandbox. He asked his friends if they had seen the big cheese, but no one knew where it was. Tim did not give up. He was determined to find the cheese. As Tim kept searching, he saw a big cat near the trees. The cat had the big cheese! Tim wanted to be brave and get the cheese for his friends, but the cat was very scary. Tim tried to sneak up, but the cat saw him. The cat chased Tim and caught him. Tim did not find the cheese and could not play with his friends anymore. The cat was happy, but Tim and his friends were sad.
Once upon a time, there was a little girl named Grace. She loved to travel. Every day, she would explore the world around her. One day, she decided to take a trip to the park. She was very excited and put on her special sock. It made her happy. She ran out the door and began to explore. At the park, she felt the wet grass beneath her feet. She loved the feeling of the dampness against her sock. She wanted to explore more, so she continued to travel around the park. Suddenly, she heard a voice calling out to her. It was her mom! "Grace! Come here! You are getting your sock wet!" Grace was surprised. She had not noticed that her sock was getting damp. She quickly ran back to her mom and went home. The End.
Once upon a time, there was a polite lawyer named Tom. He liked to help people learn new things. One day, he met a little girl named Sue who was sad.
"Why are you sad?" asked Tom. Sue said, "I don't know how to say 'please' and 'thank you'. My friends say I am not nice." Tom smiled and said, "I can help you learn."
Tom taught Sue how to be polite. They practiced saying "please" and "thank you" together. Soon, Sue was very good at it. Her friends were happy and liked her more.
One day, Sue's friend Tim was sad. Sue asked, "Why are you sad?" Tim said, "I don't know how to share my toys." Sue smiled and said, "I can help you learn." She taught Tim how to share, just like Tom taught her.
The moral of the story is that when we learn good things, we can help others learn too.
Lena and Max were twins who liked to observe things. They had a big book with pictures of animals and plants. They learned their names and sounds. One day, they saw a new picture of a big cat with spots. It was called a leopard. "Wow, look at the leopard!" Max said. "It has strong teeth and claws. It can run fast and climb trees. It is a hunter." "I like the leopard too," Lena said. "But it looks sad. Why is its lip bleeding?" Max looked closer and saw a red mark on the leopard's lip. He remembered something from the book. He said, "Maybe it fought with another leopard. The book says they are very territorial. That means they don't like to share their space." Lena nodded. She felt sorry for the leopard. She said, "Maybe we can help it. We can give it some water and a band-aid. Then it will feel better." Max agreed. He said, "Let's go and find it. Maybe it is in the zoo or the park. Come on, Lena, let's go!" They put on their hats and shoes and ran outside. They did not see their mom, who was busy in the kitchen. She did not hear them leave. She did not know they were looking for a leopard. She did not know they were in trouble.
Once upon a time, there was a big white cat named Fluffy. Fluffy loved to play outside. One day, Fluffy went to the west to find a new friend. In the west, Fluffy met a small brown dog named Spot. Spot liked to stir in the dirt with his paws. Fluffy asked, "Can I play with you?" Spot said, "Yes, let's play together!" Fluffy and Spot played in the dirt and stirred it up. They laughed and had lots of fun. They became best friends and played together every day. And they lived happily ever after.
Once upon a time, there was a brave knight named Sir Peter. He was tall and strong and he had a bald head. Every day he would go on a new adventure and his most favourite adventure was looking for a magical sword. One morning, Sir Peter was ready to start his quest. He searched high and low until he reached a dark cave. Inside, he found the sword and started to pick it up. Suddenly, the ground started to rumble and a giant appeared before him. The giant said, "If you wants the sword, you will have to fight me!" Sir Peter looked up bravely and said, "I accept your challenge!" The two battled for hours until finally Sir Peter struck true and the giant disappeared. He took his sword and started to go home proud of his victory. The end.
"Mommy, why do you have to go to work?" asked the little 3-year old girl. "It's very important for me to go to work. I gain lots of things from working like money to buy the things we need and knowledge to help us understand the world better," Mommy said. The little girl was not satisfied. "But why can't someone else do the work?" "It's my job and I'm the one who is responsible," Mommy said, her voice calm and steady. "But wouldn't it be better if you stayed home with me mommy?" "Yes, it would. But I also need to gain my own goals and dreams. Work helps me do that," Mommy said. The little girl thought about this and finally understood. "Ok, mommy. Go to work and come back soon." "I will, I promise," Mommy said and gave the little girl a warm hug.
One day, a little girl named Lily went to the park. Lily felt very lucky because it was a sunny day. She saw a big pond with ducks. Lily wanted to play with the ducks, so she went close to the pond. Lily saw a duck with dirty wings. She said, "Hi, duck! You need a wash. Can I help you?" The duck said, "Yes, please!" Lily was very happy to help. She took water from the pond and washed the duck's wings. After the wash, the duck's wings were clean and shiny. The duck said, "Thank you, Lily! I feel lucky to have a friend like you." Lily smiled and said, "You're welcome, duck! I am lucky to have a friend like you too!" They played together in the park, and Lily and the duck became best friends.
Once upon a time, there was a little boy named Tim. Tim had a pair of shoes that he loved very much. But one day, the heel of his shoe broke. Tim was sad and frightened. He did not know what to do. Tim went to his mom and said, "Mommy, my shoe is broken. Can you help me?" His mom looked at the shoe and said, "Don't worry, Tim. I can repair it for you." Mom took the shoe and fixed the heel. Tim was so happy to see his shoe all better. He put it on and said, "Thank you, Mommy! Now I can play again." From that day on, Tim was not frightened when something broke. He knew that with a little help, anything could be fixed. And they all lived happily ever after.
Once upon a time, there was an honest dog named Bob. Bob loved to eat toast for breakfast. Every day, he would ask his mom for toast with butter and jam. One day, Bob heard a noise. He paused and listened. The noise was coming from the kitchen. He thought, "Maybe it's a new friend!" So, he went to see who it was. When he got to the kitchen, he saw a cat eating his toast! Bob was surprised. He had never seen a cat eat toast before. The cat looked up and said, "Hi, I'm Cat. Can we share the toast?" Bob smiled and said, "Yes, we can share." From that day on, Bob and Cat became best friends who loved to eat toast together.
Once upon a time, there was a very adventurous cat named Kitty. Kitty loved to talk to her friends. Her friends were a dog, a bird, and a fish. They played with their toys and had lots of fun. One day, Kitty and her friends found some new stuff. It was a big box. They wanted to see what was inside. They opened the box and found a big, colorful ball. They were so excited and started to play with the ball. As they played, something unexpected happened. The ball started to talk! It was a magic ball that could talk and play games. The ball became their new friend. Kitty and her friends had even more fun with the talking ball. They played together every day and had many more adventures.
Once upon a time, there was a pale boy named Tim. Tim loved to perform in his favorite sport, running. One sunny day, Tim went to the park to run with his friends. At the park, Tim saw a new boy, Sam. Sam was sitting alone, looking sad. Tim went to Sam and asked, "Do you want to play with us?" Sam looked up and said, "I want to, but I am not good at any sport." Tim smiled and said, "That's okay! We can help you learn." Tim and his friends helped Sam learn how to run and perform better in the sport. Soon, Sam was having fun and running with the others. They all became good friends. The moral of the story is to always be kind and help others, even if they are not good at something. Everyone can learn and have fun together.
Once upon a time, there was a graceful jungle. It had tall trees and lots of lovely animals that lived happily there. In the middle of the jungle, there was a big fire. It burned and burned and burned. The fire was so hot that it scared all the animals. They ran away and couldn't stop. The monkeys jumped from branches, the zebras galloped in all directions, and the birds flew high in the sky. But then something amazing happened. A graceful elephant came up to the fire with a big, long trunk. It started to blow on the fire and the flames went lower and lower until the fire was totally out. And the animals all came back to the jungle and were happy again.
One day, a little cat went out to play. The cat saw a big, attractive tree. The tree had many leaves that could cover the cat. The cat thought it was a good place to hide. The cat climbed up the tree and saw a bird. The bird had a snack in its mouth. The cat said, "Hi, bird! What is that snack for?" The bird replied, "This snack is for my babies. They are hungry." The cat felt happy for the bird and its babies. They played together in the tree, with the leaves covering them. They had a great time and became good friends.
One day, a boy named Tim was playing in the mud. He got his legs very dirty. He liked to jump and splash in the puddles. His mom saw him and said, "Tim, you have dirty legs! Let's go wash them." Tim and his mom went inside to wash his legs. His mom said, "Tim, remember to always clean your legs after playing in the mud." Tim nodded and said, "Yes, mom. I will." The next day, Tim played with his friend, Sam. Sam had dirty legs too. Tim said, "Sam, let's go wash our legs. My mom says we should always clean them after playing in the mud." Sam agreed, and they both went to wash their legs. The moral of the story is to always listen to your parents and keep yourself clean.
Anna liked to play with her mom's makeup. She wanted to look like a princess. She found a big box of makeup in her mom's room. She opened it and saw many colors and brushes. She was very happy. She took some makeup and put it on her face. She used red for her lips, blue for her eyes, and pink for her cheeks. She looked in the mirror and smiled. She thought she was very impressive. She wanted to show her mom. She ran to the living room, where her mom was reading a book. She said, "Mom, look at me! I am a princess!" Her mom looked at her and was very surprised. She saw the makeup all over Anna's face. She said, "Oh, Anna, what have you done? You used my makeup without asking me. That is not nice. You made a big mess." Anna felt sad. She did not want to make her mom angry. She said, "I'm sorry, mom. I just wanted to look like you. You are always so impressive. Can you forgive me?" Her mom hugged her and said, "Of course, I forgive you, Anna. You are my sweet princess. But you don't need makeup to be impressive. You are impressive just the way you are. Now, let's go and restore your face. We need to wash off the makeup and use some cream. Then, we can play together. How does that sound?" Anna nodded and said, "That sounds good, mom. I love you." Her mom said, "I love you too, Anna." They went to the bathroom and restored Anna's face. Then, they played with some dolls and had fun. Anna learned to ask before using her mom's makeup. She also learned that she was impressive without makeup. She was happy.
Luke had a huge chess board. He had owned it for a long time and he loved to play with it. He had lots of little pieces that moved around on the board. He put the pieces in different places to make the shapes of animals and people. Every day, Luke and his mom played chess together. His mom was very good at it and would show Luke the different pieces and how they moved. One day, Luke and his mom spotted a huge, giant chess set in the park. They had never seen a chess set that big before. They were so excited and had to go take a closer look. When they got to the chess set, they saw that every piece was made from wood and were much bigger than the pieces Luke had at home. Luke and his mom played the game together and Luke couldn't believe how much fun it was. Luke asked his mom if they could get a huge chess set just like the one he saw in the park. His mom said that she would look for one and, the next day, she gave Luke the best present ever - a huge wooden chess set. He was so excited and spent hours playing the game with his mom. Now Luke owned his own, huge chess set that he could play with every day.
One day, a little boy named Tim found a big, heavy box. He wanted to examine it. It had a lock on it. Tim thought it must be a safe. He felt guilty for wanting to open it, but he was very curious. Tim asked his friend, Sam, to help him open the safe. They tried and tried, but it would not open. They were sad, but then they had an idea. They would ask the wise old owl who lived in the tree. The wise old owl told them a secret word to open the safe. Tim and Sam went back to the safe and said the secret word. The safe opened! But, something unexpected happened. Instead of finding treasure, they found a note. The note said, "You are now the keepers of the safe. Use it to keep your things safe and help others." Tim and Sam were happy. They learned that it is good to help others and keep things safe.
Once upon a time, there was a slow snail named Sam. Sam loved to eat prunes. One day, Sam found a big prune under a tree. He was very happy and started to eat it. Suddenly, a bird came down from the tree. The bird saw the prune and wanted to eat it too. The bird was fast, but Sam did not want to share his prune. Sam thought of a plan to keep the prune for himself. Sam told the bird, "I will race you for the prune. If you win, you can have it." The bird laughed and agreed to the race. They started to race, but Sam knew he could not win. So, he quickly hid the prune under a leaf. The bird did not see him do it. The bird won the race and looked for the prune. But the prune was gone! The bird felt regret because he did not watch Sam closely. Sam smiled and went back to the leaf where he hid the prune. He enjoyed the rest of the prune all by himself.
Once there was a pear tree. The tree was in a sunny garden and every spring it would bloom. And when it bloomed, it was so beautiful that the birds stopped singing to watch. One day, a deaf little girl came to the garden. She saw the pear tree blooming and was so happy she clapped her hands. The pear tree was so happy that it bloomed even more, making the whole garden brighter. The little girl reached up and picked a pear from the tree and ate it. She smiled and the tree bloomed even more. The girl thanked the tree and promised to come back whenever the pear tree bloomed. And from then on, whenever the little girl came to the garden, the pear tree would bloom so beautifully and the birds would stop singing again.
Once there was a little girl. She was frightened of the dark but she was brave. She owned a port; a long and tall one made of wood. One night, when it was very dark, she opened her port and peeked inside. Suddenly, something startled her; a big and hairy spider. She was so frightened that she screamed and shut the port quickly. The next morning she decided to take a look again and it was not what she expected. There was now a huge hole in her port. The spider had eaten away a hole at the bottom of the port and crawled inside. She was so frightened and sad. She tried to fix the port but it was impossible. It was ruined. The little girl was very sad because she had lost her beloved port. She was so frightened and upset she ran away into the bright sunshine and never returned.
Once there was a little pig who loved to lay in the sun. One day, he saw something very fancy. It was an olive! He had never seen such a fancy olive before. He couldn't resist, so he hopped out of the sunshine and carefully crept up to the olive. He snatched it up with his snout and took it to his favourite spot in the field. He lay there in the sun and enjoyed his special treat. He chomped away at the fancy olive and ate it up until it was gone. Then the pig hopped back into the sunshine and lay there dreaming of all the fancy olives he could find. What a happy pig he was!
Once upon a time, there lived a boy called Bob. Every day, he imagined flying away in a big aeroplane. One day in the market, Bob was excited to find an aeroplane for sale! His mum said he could buy it for five cents. Bob was so happy he ran to the lady and said, "I sell five cents aeroplane please!" The lady smiled and said, "Here you go!" Bob quickly held the small aeroplane and said thank you. But then he felt embarrassed because the lady was still looking. He couldn't find any money! He had forgotten his five cents at home. Bob was very embarrassed and wished he could go home. Suddenly his mum came, with the five cents. Bob smiled and said, "I sell aeroplane, five cents please." The lady nodded and said, "Of course, take it home and fly away." Bob was so happy! He thanked the lady and ran home with his new aeroplane. He was excited to fly away in it and go to wonderful places.
One day, a little cricket named Tim went to play at the park. He saw a big slide and wanted to go down it. Tim was very excited to try the slide, but he also felt a little scared. As Tim climbed up the slide, he saw a terrible bug. The bug was big and mean. Tim was very brave and said, "Go away, bug! I want to slide!" The terrible bug looked at Tim and then flew away. Tim was happy that the bug was gone. Now, Tim was ready to slide. He sat at the top and took a deep breath. Then, he slid down the slide very fast. Tim laughed and had so much fun. He went up and down the slide many times. The little cricket had a great day at the park.
Once upon a time, there was a farm. On this farm, there was a chubby pig. The pig loved to play in the mud all day. One day, the sun was shining very bright. The pig was happy and said, "I love the sun! It makes everything shine!" A little bird flew by and heard the pig. The bird said, "Did you know that the moon can shine too? At night, it makes everything bright and pretty." The pig did not know this. He was very surprised. He wanted to see the moon shine. That night, the pig stayed awake to see the moon. It was very late, but he did not want to miss it. Finally, the moon came out. It was big and round and made everything shine just like the bird said. The pig was so happy. He danced and played in the moonlight. From then on, the pig loved the sun and the moon, because they both made the farm shine.
Once upon a time there were two best friends, Mo and Zee. They lived close to each other and loved to play. One day, Mo and Zee decided to have a picnic by the lake. They gathered some food and blankets and took off for the lake. Once they arrived to the lake, they both jumped for joy and spread out the blankets. Then Mo said to Zee, "Let's gather some flowers for our picnic." So, they grabbed a basket and picked some beautiful flowers in the meadow. When their basket was full, Mo and Zee admired their handiwork. They smiled brightly and gathered up their things to go back home. On the way, Mo noticed a bumblebee buzzing around a flower. He pointed to it with his finger and said, "Look Zee! A bee gathering nectar from the flower. It's so happy!" Zee's eyes were wide with wonder. She reached out with her finger to touch the bee's lip and said, "It tickles!" Mo and Zee laughed and enjoyed the rest of the way home. They were happy to have shared such an amazing adventure together.
Once upon a time, in a small house, there was a playful dog named Buddy. Buddy loved to jump, run, and play all day long. He had a favorite chair where he would rest after a long day of fun. One sunny day, Buddy saw a big bow on his chair. He didn't know what it was, so he got closer to see. As he touched the bow, it fell on the floor. Buddy was scared and ran away. He didn't know that his friend, Kitty, put the bow there as a gift for him. Later, Kitty came to the house and saw the bow on the floor. She felt sad that Buddy didn't like her gift. Buddy saw Kitty's sad face and felt bad too. He decided to make Kitty happy again. Buddy picked up the bow, put it on his chair, and then bowed to Kitty. Kitty smiled and they both played together. The moral of the story is to always be kind and say thank you for the gifts you receive, even if they are unexpected.
Ben and Mia like to draw with crayons. They have many colors and papers. One day, they want to draw a bird. They look at the window and see a blue bird on a tree. "Look, Mia, a bird!" Ben says. "Let's draw it!" "OK, Ben, I like birds!" Mia says. "You draw the body and I draw the wings!" They start to draw the bird. Ben makes a big oval for the body. Mia makes two triangles for the wings. They use blue and yellow crayons. "Done!" Ben says. "We complete the bird!" But Mia is not happy. She looks at the bird and shakes her head. "No, Ben, the bird is not complete!" Mia says. "It needs a beak and eyes and feet!" "Oh, you are right, Mia!" Ben says. "Let's add them!" They use orange and black crayons to make the beak, the eyes and the feet. They also make a branch for the bird to sit on. "Now the bird is complete!" Mia says. "It looks like the real one!" They show their drawing to Mom. Mom smiles and hugs them. "Wow, what a beautiful bird!" Mom says. "You are very good at drawing!" Ben and Mia feel happy. They put their drawing on the fridge with a magnet. They see the blue bird fly away from the window. "Bye, bird!" Ben and Mia say. "Thank you for being our model!"
Once upon a time, there was a big red car. The car loved to travel. One day, the car met a blue truck. The truck had an unusual cable. The car wanted to know more about the cable. The car asked the truck, "What is that unusual cable for?" The truck said, "I use the cable to help my friends when they are stuck." One day, while they were traveling together, they saw a big tree in the road. The car and the truck did not know what to do. Then, the truck had an idea. The truck said, "I can use my unusual cable to move the tree!" The truck used the unusual cable to move the big tree. The car and the truck were happy. They could travel again. They traveled together and had a lot of fun.
Once upon a time, there was a boy named Tim. He liked to jog every day. Tim was an honest boy, and he always remembered to say "please" and "thank you." One day, while Tim was jogging, he saw a big box. It was a surprise! Tim did not know what was inside the box. He remembered that his mom told him to be careful with things he did not know. Tim decided to take the box home. When he opened it, he found a big red ball. It was so big that it could bounce very high! Tim played with the ball all day. But then, something unexpected happened. The ball started to talk! It said, "Thank you for playing with me, Tim. I was lonely in the box." Tim was surprised, but he was happy to have a new friend. He remembered to always be honest and kind, and he and the talking ball had lots of fun together.
Once upon a time, there was a curious little girl named Amy. Amy liked to pick flowers and play with her dog, Max. One day, Amy and Max went for a walk in the park. Amy saw a big tree with many leaves. She wanted to pick a leaf from the tree. As she tried to reach the leaf, she heard a voice. "Hello! Can you help me?" said the voice. Amy looked around and saw a squirrel wearing pants. "I need help to pick nuts," said the squirrel. Amy was surprised but wanted to help the squirrel. She picked nuts for the squirrel and put them in the squirrel's pants. They all laughed and played together. And from that day, Amy, Max, and the squirrel with pants became the best of friends.
Once upon a time, in the middle of a meadow, there was a port. It was a peaceful place, and birds could be heard singing in the trees. One day, a graceful deer decided to invite a group of friendly animals to come and have a picnic at the port. The deer went around to every animal he knew and extended the invitation. The animals were overjoyed, and immediately started making their way to the port. When they arrived, they all saw the beauty of the port. The trees had bright green leaves, and the birds were chirping. Everyone smiled at the sight. The animals had a great time together. They ate, played, and even told stories. When it was time to go, the deer said, "It doesn't matter where we're going, or who we're going with. What matters is how we treat each other when we're there". The animals all agreed and left the port with a feeling of joy and satisfaction. The moral of the story is that kindness is always important, no matter where we are.
Ben likes to build with his blocks. He has many blocks of different colors and shapes. He can make towers, bridges, houses and more. Sometimes he builds with his friends, and sometimes he builds by himself. One day, Ben decides to build a kangaroo. He thinks kangaroos are fun and fast. He finds some brown blocks and some white blocks. He makes a big body, a long tail, a small head and two ears. He adds two legs and two arms. He looks at his kangaroo and smiles. But something is missing. His kangaroo has no eyes, no nose, no mouth. It cannot see, smell or talk. Ben thinks hard. He looks around his room. He sees his stickers. He has stickers of eyes, noses, mouths and more. He runs to get his stickers. He puts two eyes, a nose and a mouth on his kangaroo's face. He also puts a sticker of a pouch on its belly. He remembers that kangaroos have pouches to carry their babies. He wonders if his kangaroo has a baby. He looks inside the pouch. It is empty. Ben feels sad. He wants his kangaroo to have a friend. He thinks of a way to make a baby kangaroo. He finds some smaller blocks and some more stickers. He makes a smaller body, a shorter tail, a tiny head and two ears. He adds two legs and two arms. He puts two eyes, a nose and a mouth on its face. He puts it inside the pouch. He looks at his kangaroo and its baby. He feels happy. He hugs them and says, "Hello, kangaroo. Hello, baby kangaroo. You are my friends. I built you with my blocks and my stickers. I love you."
Once upon a time, there was a man and his wife. They lived in a small house with their dog. The man had to leave for work every day. His wife would stay home and take care of the house. She was very patient and kind. One day, the man said to his wife, "I must leave for work now, but I will be back soon. Please take care of our dog." The wife said, "I will be patient and wait for you to come back. Our dog and I will be here." The wife and the dog played together while the man was at work. They had a lot of fun. The dog was very happy to be with the wife. They laughed and played all day. When the man came back from work, he saw his wife and the dog playing. He was very happy to see them. He said, "Thank you for being patient and taking care of our dog." The wife smiled and said, "We had a great day together." From that day on, the man, his wife, and their dog lived happily together. They always had fun and the wife was always patient when the man had to leave for work.
Once upon a time there was a little kid. He was very excited to go exploring in the forest. As he walked, he suddenly saw something strange. It was a giant blue mushroom. He was curious and wanted to take the mushroom, so he snuck up to it very carefully. Suddenly, the mushroom shrank! The little kid was so surprised, he shouted loudly. His mom came running and told him, "It's not nice to take things that don't belong to you. The mushroom was not yours, so it's not respectful to take it." The little kid understood his mom's lesson. From then on, he was much more respectful and caring of things that weren't his. He learned that once things are taken away, they will not come back. The end.
One day, a little boy named Tim was walking with his mom. They went to the mailbox to get the mail. Tim was nervous because he had never done this before. His mom said, "I will show you how to do it." They walked up to the mailbox and Tim's mom opened it. Inside, there was a big, shiny ball. Tim was surprised! He asked, "Mom, why is there a ball in the mailbox?" His mom was also surprised and said, "I don't know, Tim. This is very strange!" Just then, a little girl came running up to them. She said, "I'm sorry! That's my ball! I put it in the mailbox by mistake." Tim and his mom laughed. They gave the ball back to the little girl and got their mail. Tim was not nervous anymore. He was happy that he could help the little girl find her ball.
Once upon a time, in a land with lots of snow, there was a gentle boy named Tom. Tom loved to play in the snow. One day, he built a big igloo with his friends. They made it with snow and ice. It was very fun. Tom had a pet dog named Max. Max was a big, white, and fluffy dog. Max liked to ride on a sled with Tom. They would go very fast in the snow. Tom and Max were best friends. One day, Tom and Max went to the igloo with their friends. They played inside and had a big snowball fight. After playing, they sat in the igloo and shared yummy cookies. Tom, Max, and their friends had a great day in the snow.
One day, a clever cat named Tom found a rake in his yard. He wanted to use it to clean up the leaves. He started to rake the leaves into a big pile. Tom's friend, a dog named Max, came by and saw Tom with the rake. Max said, "Tom, can I help you with the rake?" Tom didn't want to accept Max's help. He thought he could do it all by himself. Max felt sad and walked away. Tom kept raking the leaves. But he got very tired. The pile of leaves was too big for him to finish. He wished he had accepted Max's help. Now, the yard was still messy and Tom was too tired to play.
Once upon a time, there was a little black cat named Kitty. Kitty lived in a small house with a nice family. The family had a mom, a dad, and a little girl named Sue. Sue loved to play with Kitty all day long. One day, Sue wanted to play a new game with Kitty. She took Kitty upstairs to her room. Sue had a big box that she wanted to see if Kitty could fit in. Sue put the box on the floor and opened the top. Kitty looked at the box and then looked at Sue. Sue said, "Come on, Kitty. Let's see if you can fit in the box!" Kitty jumped into the box and curled up inside. Sue laughed and clapped her hands. "Good job, Kitty! You fit in the box!" Sue and Kitty played upstairs with the box for the rest of the day.
Once upon a time, there was a cat named Tim. Tim was very good at balance. He could walk on thin walls and not fall. Tim loved to play outside in all kinds of weather. Rain or shine, he would go out and have fun. One day, the weather was very windy. Tim wanted to show his balance skills to his friends. He climbed up a thin wall and started walking. The wind was strong, but Tim was persistent. He kept trying and did not give up. Tim walked on the wall for a long time. His friends watched and clapped. They were so happy to see Tim balance in the windy weather. Even though it was hard, Tim's persistent heart made him a hero to his friends. And they all played together in the wind, having a great time.
One day, a tall girl named Lily went to the park with her mom. She saw a big slide and wanted to try it. She ran to the slide and climbed up the ladder. "Can I go first, mom?" she asked. "Sure, honey, but be careful," her mom said. Lily sat on the slide and pushed herself down. She felt the wind in her hair and the sun on her face. She smiled and shouted, "Whee!" But then, she saw a boy at the bottom of the slide. He was not moving and he looked angry. He had a red ball in his hand. "Hey, you!" he yelled. "This is my slide! You can't use it!" Lily was scared and stopped. She did not know what to do. She did not want to make the boy mad, but she also wanted to have fun. "Who are you?" she asked. "I'm Max, and this is my park," he said. "You have to ask me before you play here." Lily did not think that was fair. She did not see any sign that said the park was his. She thought the park was for everyone. "No, it's not," she said. "The park is for all the kids. You can't tell me what to do." "Yes, I can," he said. "You're a girl, and girls are silly. You don't know how to play right." Lily felt angry and sad. She did not like what he said. She thought girls were smart and fun. She wanted to tell him that, but she did not know how. She looked at her mom, who was watching them. Her mom smiled and nodded. She gave her a sign to start talking. Lily took a deep breath and said, "You're wrong, Max. Girls are not silly. Girls are awesome. And I know how to play right. I can slide and run and jump and throw. I can do anything you can do. And I can share, too. Do you want to play with me and my mom? We can take turns on the slide and play with your ball." Max was surprised. He did not expect her to say that. He looked at her and her mom. They seemed nice and friendly. He felt a little sorry for being mean. He thought for a moment and said, "Okay, Lily. I'm sorry for being mean. You can play with me and my ball. And we can share the slide. But you have to promise me one thing." "What is it?" she asked. "You have to promise me that you won't be taller than me," he said. Lily laughed and said, "I can't promise that, Max. I don't know how tall I will be. But I can promise that I will be your friend." Max smiled and said, "That's good enough for me. Come on, let's play." And they did. They played on the slide and with the ball. They had fun and learned to get along. And their moms were happy, too. They watched them and talked to each other. They were glad that their kids started to be friends.
One day, a fat cat named Tom went for a walk. He wore a leash so he would not get lost. Tom liked to walk and see new things. As Tom walked, he saw a big dog. The dog saw Tom and wanted to play. Tom was scared, but the dog just wanted to be friends. They played and had fun together. Then, Tom found a spray bottle. He sprayed the water at the dog. The dog was surprised and ran away. Tom laughed and went back home. The dog came back with a ball, and they played together again. The dog and Tom became best friends.
Anna and Ben are friends. They like to play outside. One day, they go to the field near their house. The field has many flowers and trees. Anna and Ben run and laugh in the field. "Look, Ben, a bird!" Anna says. She points to a big bird on a branch. The bird is brown and white. It has a long beak and a crest. "Wow, Anna, it is beautiful!" Ben says. He wants to see the bird better. He walks slowly to the tree. He does not want to scare the bird. Anna follows Ben. She is curious too. They reach the tree. They peek behind the trunk. They see the bird. The bird sees them. It makes a loud noise. It flaps its wings. It flies away. "Bye, bird!" Anna and Ben say. They wave to the bird. They are not sad. They are happy. They saw a healthy bird. They learned something new. They hug each other. They go back to play in the field. They have fun.
Once upon a time, there was a little boy named Tim. He was a restless boy, always wanting to play and have fun. One sunny day, Tim went to the park with his best friend, Sam. As they played, they found a treasure map under a big tree. The map showed them where to find a hidden treasure. Tim and Sam were very excited and started to look for the treasure. They dug and dug until they found a big box. Tim said, "Let's open the box and see the treasure!" When they opened the box, they found shiny coins and pretty toys. Tim was so happy that he pinched Sam's arm. Sam laughed and said, "Ouch! That tickles!" They played with their new toys and shared their treasure with their friends. And from that day on, Tim and Sam had even more fun at the park.
Lily and Tom were playing in their room. They liked to pretend they were heroes and villains. Lily was the hero and Tom was the villain. Tom had a big closet where he hid his toys and clothes. He said it was his secret base. "Give me back my teddy bear, you mean villain!" Lily shouted. She had a soft teddy bear that she loved very much. Tom had taken it and locked it in his closet. He was envious of Lily's teddy bear. He wanted it for himself. "Never! It's mine now!" Tom said. He laughed and ran to his closet. He locked the door and turned off the light. He hugged the teddy bear and smiled. Lily was angry and sad. She wanted to rescue her teddy bear. She knocked on the closet door and said, "Please, Tom, give me back my teddy bear. It's not nice to take things that are not yours." "No, go away!" Tom said. He did not want to share. He did not care about Lily's feelings. Lily tried to open the closet door, but it was too hard. She could not break it. She looked around and saw a chair. She had an idea. She dragged the chair to the closet and climbed on it. She reached for the doorknob and turned it. The door opened a little bit. She saw a crack of light and the teddy bear's ear. "Ha! I got you!" Lily said. She grabbed the teddy bear and pulled it out. She was happy. She jumped off the chair and ran to her bed. She hugged the teddy bear and said, "I rescued you, my teddy bear. I love you." But then, something bad happened. The chair fell over and hit the closet door. The door slammed shut and locked. Tom was still inside. He was scared and alone. He screamed and cried. He wanted to get out. He banged on the door and said, "Help! Help! Let me out!" Lily heard Tom's voice. She felt sorry for him. She wanted to help him. She ran to the closet and tried to open the door. But it was too late. The door was stuck. She could not open it. She cried and said, "I'm sorry, Tom. I didn't mean to lock you in. Please, don't be mad at me." But Tom did not hear her. He was too loud and too scared. He kept screaming and crying. He wished he had not taken Lily's teddy bear. He wished he had been nice to her. He wished he had a hero to rescue him. But there was no hero. There was only a closet. A dark and lonely closet. The end.
Once upon a time, there was a happy family who lived together in a house. This family loved to climb - they would often climb trees and rocks around their home, even when it was winter! This day, the family decided to climb something different - a mountain! It was a very steep mountain and they would need to be careful. Everyone grabbed their climbing gear and started the climb. It was hard work, but soon they found themselves at the top. The family looked around and were amazed. The view was so deep and beautiful - it was like nothing they'd ever seen before! They all climbed back down the other side. On the way down, their youngest had a question. "Daddy," the child asked, "Can we come back here again?" "Yes," Daddy replied with a smile, "We can come back here anytime we want." The family continued their climb down and enjoyed the amazing views. They all said that this was the best mountain they'd ever climbed!
Tom and Lily were friends who liked to print pictures with their crayons. They had a big book of animals that they copied on paper. One day, they found a new animal in the book. It was called a zip. It had a long nose, a curly tail and black and white stripes. "Wow, look at this zip!" Tom said. "It is so funny and jolly. I want to print it." "Me too, me too!" Lily said. "Let's print it together." They took a big sheet of paper and started to draw the zip. Tom drew the nose and the tail. Lily drew the stripes and the eyes. They used many colors and made the zip very bright. But then, they had a problem. They both wanted to draw the zip's mouth. "No, I want to draw the mouth!" Tom said. "I drew the nose, so I should draw the mouth too." "No, I want to draw the mouth!" Lily said. "I drew the eyes, so I should draw the mouth too." They started to pull the paper and the crayons. They were angry and sad. They did not want to share the zip. "Stop, stop!" a voice said. It was their teacher, Miss Rose. She saw what they were doing and came to help them. "What is going on here?" she asked. "Why are you fighting over the zip?" Tom and Lily told her what happened. They both wanted to draw the zip's mouth. Miss Rose smiled and said, "I have an idea. Why don't you draw two mouths for the zip? One on each side of the nose. Then, the zip will have a big smile and you will both be happy." Tom and Lily liked the idea. They drew two mouths for the zip, one red and one blue. They looked at their picture and laughed. The zip was very funny and jolly. They were friends again. They showed their picture to Miss Rose and said, "Thank you, Miss Rose. You are very smart and kind." Miss Rose hugged them and said, "You are very welcome, Tom and Lily. You are very creative and sweet. I'm glad you learned to share and cooperate. Now, let's print some more pictures."
One day, a girl named Lucy went to the kitchen. She wanted to find something yummy to eat. She opened the refrigerator and saw a big cake. But the cake started to talk! "Hello, Lucy! I am Cakey. Do you want to be friends?" said the cake. Lucy was very surprised. She had never met a talking cake before. But she liked to make new friends, so she said, "Yes, Cakey! Let's be friends." Lucy and Cakey played and laughed all day. But then, something unexpected happened. Cakey started to get smaller and smaller. Lucy was so sad. She did not want to lose her new friend. "Don't worry, Lucy," said Cakey. "I am not going away. I am just changing into something new." Suddenly, Cakey turned into a little toy cake. Lucy was so happy. Now she could keep her friend Cakey with her always.
Once upon a time, in a normal house, a little girl named Mia loved to eat dinner. Every day, her mom made yummy food for her. Mia's favorite dinner was spaghetti. She loved it so much! One day, Mia came home and saw her mom was not there. Her dad said, "I will make dinner today." Mia was a little bit worried because her dad never made dinner before. But she thought it would be fun to try something new. When dinner was ready, Mia saw something strange on her plate. It was not spaghetti. It was something green! Mia was scared, but she tried the green food. To her surprise, it was very yummy! She loved it! Mia learned that trying new things can be fun and yummy too.
Once there was a little girl named Amy. She had long purple hair and her favourite colour was purple. She loved to run around and explore her house. One day, she wanted to go exploring but she couldn't reach the things high up in the cupboards. She asked her mum to lend her some help. Her mum smiled and said yes. She gave Amy a tall purple chair and Amy ran over to the cupboard. She was so excited to see what was inside! But the chair was too tall. When she tried to climb onto it, she fell down onto the floor. Amy's mum smiled. She kneeled down to the floor and helped Amy up onto the chair. Now Amy was tall enough to reach the top of the cupboards. She was so happy! Amy thanked her mum for lending her a helping hand. Then, she happily went to explore the cupboards.
Once upon a time, there was a big room with a bookcase. Many books lived on the bookcase. In the room, there was also a clever cat named Tom. Tom liked to jump and play all day. One day, as Tom was playing, he saw something strange. A new book appeared on the bookcase. It was a big, red book. Tom was very curious. He jumped up to look at the new book. When Tom touched the book, something unexpected happened. The book opened and out came a funny little bird. The bird said, "I'm not a real bird. I am a magic bird!" Tom was surprised. The magic bird and Tom became best friends and played together every day.
Lily and Ben were twins who liked to play in the garden. One day, they saw a big melon on the table. It was green and round and smelled sweet. "Let's eat the melon!" Lily said. "No, we can't. Mom said it is for dessert. We have to wait," Ben said. But Lily was naughty. She did not listen to Ben. She took the melon and ran away. Ben chased her, but he was too slow. Lily ran to the swing and put the melon on the seat. She pushed the swing hard. The melon flew in the air. It flew over the fence and landed on the neighbor's roof. "Uh-oh," Lily said. "Uh-oh," Ben said. The neighbor was angry. He came out and shouted. "Who threw this melon on my roof? It made a big mess. It is not nice to be naughty!" Lily and Ben were scared. They ran back to the house and hid under the bed. They hoped Mom would not find out. They learned their lesson. They should not be naughty and play with the melon. They should wait for dessert.
Ben and Mia are friends. They like to play in the park. One day, they see a big melon on a table. The melon is green and round. It has black spots on it. "Wow, look at that melon!" Ben says. "It is so big and unique. I want to touch it." "Me too," Mia says. "But we have to ask first. Maybe it belongs to someone." They walk to the table. They see a man sitting on a chair. He is reading a book. He has a hat and a beard. "Excuse me, sir," Ben says. "Can we touch your melon? It is very pretty." The man looks up. He smiles. He has kind eyes. "Sure, you can touch it," he says. "But be careful. It is heavy. It is a watermelon. It has water inside. Do you want to try some?" "Yes, please," Ben and Mia say. The man takes a knife. He cuts the melon in half. He gives a piece to Ben and a piece to Mia. They see the red flesh and the black seeds. They smell the sweet juice. "Thank you, sir," Ben and Mia say. They bite the melon. It is cold and juicy. It tastes good. They make a mess. They laugh. They lean on the table. They enjoy the melon. They share with the man. They make a new friend. They are happy.
One day, a little boy named Tim went to the kitchen. He saw a big red box on the table. Tim was curious about what was inside the box. He wanted to unlock it. But his mom said, "Tim, don't unlock the box. It has spicy things inside. You won't like it." Tim didn't listen to his mom. When his mom went away, he unlocked the box. Inside, he saw a red, spicy pepper. He thought it looked like a fun toy, so he took a big bite. Suddenly, Tim felt a lot of heat in his mouth. It was too spicy for him! He cried and ran to his mom. His mom gave him a glass of milk to help with the heat. She said, "Tim, you should always listen to your mom and dad. We know what is best for you." Tim learned his lesson. From that day on, he always listened to his mom and dad, and he never unlocked things without asking.
Once upon a time, in a small place, there lived a harmless cat named Mimi. Mimi loved to play with her ball. One day, she saw a butterfly in the garden. Mimi wanted to play with the butterfly too. Mimi asked the butterfly, "Do you want to play with me?" The butterfly said, "Yes, but first you must release me from this spider web." Mimi used her paw to help the butterfly get free. After Mimi helped the butterfly, they played together all day long. They had so much fun in the garden. When it was time to go home, Mimi said, "Goodbye, butterfly! Let's play again soon!" The butterfly agreed and they both went to their homes, happy and tired.
One day, a big red ball was in the park. A little boy named Tim saw the ball and wanted to play. He ran to the ball and tried to pull it, but it was very big and heavy. Tim tried and tried, but he could not move the ball. In the evening, Tim's friend, Sue, came to the park. She saw Tim and the big red ball. Sue had an idea. She told Tim, "Let's pull the ball together!" They held hands and pulled the big red ball together. It started to move! But then, something unexpected happened. The big red ball was not a ball at all! It was a big red balloon! When Tim and Sue pulled it, the balloon flew up into the sky. They laughed and watched the big red balloon float away. They had fun, even though the ball was really a balloon.
Tom and Anna were twins who liked to play in the garden. One day, they saw a big hole in the fence. They were curious and wanted to see what was on the other side. They crawled through the hole and found a big road with many cars and trucks. "Wow, look at all the noise and colors!" Tom said. "Let's go closer and touch them!" Anna said. They ran towards the road, not looking where they were going. They did not hear their mom calling them from the house. "Tom! Anna! Come back here right now!" their mom's voice shouted. But they did not listen. They were too excited by the road. They did not see the big truck coming towards them. It was very fast and loud. It honked its horn. "Beep! Beep! Beep!" Tom and Anna were scared. They realized they were in danger. They tried to escape, but they were too late. The truck was too close. They closed their eyes and waited for the crash. But nothing happened. They opened their eyes and saw their dad holding them in his arms. He had run out of the house and grabbed them just in time. He had saved them from the truck. "Tom! Anna! Are you okay?" their dad asked. They nodded, but they were still shaking. They were sorry for what they had done. They hugged their dad and said: "Thank you, dad. We love you. We are sorry. We were silly. We will not do it again." Their dad was relieved and angry. He was glad they were safe, but he was also mad at them for being so careless. He took them back to the house and scolded them. "Tom! Anna! You were very naughty and foolish. You could have been hurt or killed by the truck. You should never go near the road without an adult. You should always listen to your mom and dad. They know what is best for you. They love you and want to protect you. Do you understand?" Tom and Anna nodded, but they were also sad. They knew they had made a big mistake. They wanted to make their dad happy. They said: "We understand, dad. We are sorry. We will be good. We will be thoughtful. We will listen to you and mom. We love you." Their dad smiled and hugged them. He was proud of them for being honest and sorry. He said: "I love you too, Tom and Anna. I forgive you. But you have to promise me you will never do that again. And you have to help me fix the hole in the fence. Okay?" Tom and Anna agreed. They learned their lesson. They never went near the road again. They were thoughtful and obedient. They helped their dad fix the fence. They played in the garden with their mom and dad. They were happy and safe.
Sara and Ben were in a big car with their mom and dad. They were going to a new country for a holiday. Sara and Ben liked to see new things and meet new people. They had a big bag with their toys and clothes. The car drove for a long time on a big road. Sara and Ben looked out of the window and saw many trees and hills and animals. They saw cows and sheep and horses and birds. They also saw some signs with words they did not know. Mom and dad said they were in a different language. "Where are we going, mom?" Sara asked. "We are going to a small town by the sea, Sara. It is very pretty and has a nice beach and a castle. You will love it," mom said. "Can we swim in the sea, dad?" Ben asked. "Maybe, Ben. But we have to check the weather first. Sometimes it rains a lot in this country," dad said. Sara and Ben hoped it would not rain. They wanted to play in the sand and make castles and look for shells. They also wanted to see the castle and pretend they were kings and queens. Soon, the car arrived at the town. Mom and dad found a small house where they could stay. They unpacked their bag and had some lunch. Then they decided to go for a walk and see the town. They walked along the street and saw many shops and cafes and people. They also saw a big church and a park and a museum. They said hello to some people, but they did not understand what they said back. Mom and dad said they spoke a different language. "Can we go to the beach now, mom?" Sara asked. "OK, Sara. Let's go to the beach. It is not far from here," mom said. They walked to the beach and saw the sea. It was blue and shiny and had waves. They also saw the castle. It was on a hill and had towers and walls and flags. It looked very old and grand. "Wow, look at the castle, Ben. It is so big and cool. Can we go there?" Sara said. "Yes, Sara. Let's go there. Maybe we can find a treasure or a dragon," Ben said. They ran to the castle and climbed the hill. They saw a gate and a bridge and a moat. They crossed the bridge and entered the gate. They saw a courtyard and a well and some stairs. They followed the stairs and found a room with a window. They looked out of the window and saw the sea and the town and the beach. They also saw some clouds. They were dark and thick and moved fast. They heard a rumble and saw a flash. They felt a drop and then another and another. "Oh no, it is raining, Sara. It is raining a lot. We have to go back," Ben said. "Yes, Ben. It is raining. Let's go back. Maybe mom and dad are waiting for us," Sara said. They ran down the stairs and out of the gate. They crossed the bridge and the moat. They ran to the beach and saw mom and dad. They were under a big umbrella and had towels and coats. "Hi, Sara. Hi, Ben. Did you have fun at the castle?" mom asked. "Yes, mom. We had fun. But it started to rain. It rained a lot. We got wet," Sara said. "Sorry, Sara. Sorry, Ben. It rains a lot in this country. But it will stop soon. Then we can play again," dad said. "OK, dad. We hope it stops soon. We like this country. But we don't like the rain," Ben said. They hugged mom and dad and waited for the rain to stop. They looked at the sea and the castle and the town. They smiled and thought of the new things they saw and learned. They liked the unknown country. But they liked their home too.
Once upon a time, there was a girl named Lily. Lily loved to draw. She drew images of cats, dogs, and her family. It was easy for her to draw because she practiced a lot. One day, Lily drew an image of her best friend, Sam. Sam was a funny boy who loved to play with Lily. They had so much fun together. Lily wanted to give the image to Sam as a gift. Lily walked to Sam's house with the image. She was excited to give it to him. When she showed the image to Sam, he was very happy. Sam loved the image and said thank you to Lily. They played together all day, and Lily knew that giving Sam the image was a great idea.
Once upon a time, there was a little boy named Tim. Tim had a toy he did not like. It was a gold toy car. He would always say, "I hate this gold car. It is disgusting." One day, Tim was playing with his toy car. His friend, Sue, came over. Sue saw the gold car and said, "Wow, I love that gold car! Can I play with it?" Tim looked at Sue and said, "Sure, you can have it. I hate it." Sue played with the gold car and had a lot of fun. Suddenly, the gold car started to talk! It said, "Thank you for being nice to me. I was a magic car, and now I will turn into a big, fun toy!" The gold car changed into a big, colorful playhouse. Tim and Sue looked at each other, surprised. They played in the playhouse all day and had so much fun. Tim learned that he should not hate things too quickly, because sometimes they can surprise you.
Once upon a time, in a small house, there lived a clumsy cat named Tom. Tom had a best friend, a little girl named Lily. They loved to play together every day. One cold day, Tom saw a scarf on the floor. He did not recognize it. "Lily, is this your scarf?" Tom asked. "Yes, Tom! Thank you for finding it!" said Lily, happy to see her scarf again. She put on her scarf to feel warm and cozy. Tom and Lily went outside to play. They laughed and had fun. Tom tried to climb a tree, but he was too clumsy. He fell down, but Lily caught him. They both giggled and continued to play, knowing they would always help each other. And they lived happily ever after.
Once upon a time, there was a little boy named Tim. He loved to play with his toy car. One day, his toy car stopped moving. Tim was sad. He asked his mom for help. His mom said the car needed a new battery. Tim and his mom went to the store to buy a tasty snack and a new battery. Tim picked a tasty apple. They also found a battery for the toy car. Tim was happy. When they got home, Tim put the tasty apple on the table. He did not want to disturb it. He wanted to eat it later. Tim's mom put the new battery in the toy car. But, the toy car still did not move. Tim was confused. Then, his mom found a switch on the car. She turned it on, and the car started to move. Tim laughed and played with his car. The tasty apple was still on the table, waiting for Tim to eat it.
"Once upon a time, there was a big cat named Tom. Tom wanted to go to university. He thought it would be easy. But, he had a problem. His friend, the dog named Jerry, did not want him to go.
One day, Tom said to Jerry, ""I want to go to university. I want to learn new things."" Jerry was sad. He did not want Tom to leave. Jerry said, ""Please, Tom, do not go. We have so much fun together.""
Tom wanted to make Jerry happy. So, Tom bowed to Jerry and said, ""Okay, I will not go."" But, Tom was not happy. He wanted to go to university.
Days went by, and Tom was very sad. He did not play with Jerry. Jerry knew that Tom was sad. Jerry said, ""Tom, you should go to university. I want you to be happy.""
Tom went to university, but it was not easy. He missed Jerry a lot. In the end, Tom did not finish university. He came back to Jerry, but they were both sad. They learned that sometimes, even the best of friends must be apart for a little while."
"Tim and Lily were playing in the park. They saw a big truck with a loud horn. Tim wanted to go closer and see the truck. Lily was scared of the noise.
""Come on, Lily, let's go see the truck!"" Tim said. He took Lily's hand and pulled her.
""No, Tim, I don't want to go. The truck is too loud and dirty. It might hurt us."" Lily said. She tried to pull back.
""Don't be scared, Lily. The truck is not bad. It is just working. The driver is nice. He will let us look at the truck and maybe even honk the horn."" Tim said. He tried to encourage Lily.
""Really? Do you think so?"" Lily said. She was curious but still nervous.
""Yes, really. Come on, it will be fun."" Tim said. He smiled at Lily.
Lily smiled back. She decided to be brave and go with Tim. They walked to the truck and waved at the driver. The driver waved back and smiled. He saw that Tim and Lily wanted to see the truck. He opened the door and invited them in.
""Hello, kids. Do you like my truck?"" He said.
""Yes, we do. It is very big and cool."" Tim said.
""It is very loud and dirty."" Lily said.
""That's true. It is loud and dirty because it works hard. It carries a lot of things from one place to another. Do you want to see what it carries?"" He said.
""Yes, please."" Tim and Lily said.
The driver showed them the back of the truck. It had boxes and bags and cans and bottles. Tim and Lily were amazed by all the things.
""Wow, that's a lot of things. What are they for?"" Tim asked.
""They are for different people and places. Some are for stores, some are for homes, some are for schools, some are for hospitals. I deliver them every day."" He said.
""That's very nice of you. You help a lot of people."" Lily said.
""Thank you. I like my job. Do you want to hear the horn?"" He said.
""Yes, yes, yes!"" Tim and Lily said.
The driver let them sit in the front seat. He showed them the horn and let them press it. The horn made a loud beep. Tim and Lily laughed and clapped.
""That was fun. Thank you, mister."" Tim said.
""Thank you, mister."" Lily said.
""You're welcome, kids. I'm glad you liked it. Now, be careful and go back to your parents. Have a nice day."" He said.
Tim and Lily thanked him again and got out of the truck. They ran back to their parents and told them about the truck and the horn. Their parents were happy that they had fun and learned something new. They hugged them and praised them for being brave and polite. Tim and Lily felt proud and happy. They had a great day at the park."
"Tommy was lonely. He had no friends to play with. He liked to make waffles with his mom, but she was busy today. He looked at his plate of waffles. They looked yummy, but they did not talk to him.
He picked up a waffle and pretended it was a friend. He said, ""Hello, waffle. Do you want to play with me?"" He waited for the waffle to reply, but it did not say anything. He felt sad.
He tried another waffle. He said, ""Hello, waffle. Do you like cars? I have a red car. It is fast and loud."" He waited for the waffle to reply, but it did not say anything. He felt angry.
He tried one more waffle. He said, ""Hello, waffle. Do you know a song? I know a song. It goes like this: Twinkle, twinkle, little star..."" He sang the song and waited for the waffle to reply, but it did not say anything. He felt silly.
He put down the waffles and started to cry. He wished he had a real friend to talk to and play with. He did not like waffles anymore.
Then he heard a knock on the door. He wiped his tears and opened the door. He saw a girl with curly hair and a big smile. She said, ""Hi, I'm Lily. I just moved in next door. Do you want to be my friend?""
Tommy felt happy. He said, ""Yes, I do. I'm Tommy. Come in, I have waffles.""
Lily said, ""I love waffles. Can I have one?""
Tommy said, ""Sure, you can have one. But don't talk to it. It won't reply.""
Lily laughed. She said, ""That's okay. I'd rather talk to you.""
They ate the waffles and shared their toys. They sang songs and told jokes. They had fun. Tommy was not lonely anymore. He had a friend."
"Once upon a time, there was a little boy named Tom. He loved to pick flowers for his mom. One day, he saw some new equipment in the garden. It was a big, shiny, and fragile vase. Tom thought it would be perfect for the flowers he picked.
Tom went to his mom and said, ""Mom, can I use the new equipment for the flowers?"" His mom said, ""Yes, Tom, but be careful. It is very fragile and can break easily."" Tom was very excited and promised to be careful.
Tom picked the most beautiful flowers he could find and put them in the fragile vase. But he was so excited that he didn't see a big rock in the garden. He tripped and the vase fell and broke. Tom was sad and his mom came to help. She said, ""It's okay, Tom. Remember, we should always be careful with fragile things."" Tom learned his lesson and from then on, he was always careful with fragile things. The moral of the story is to always be careful with the things that can break easily."
"Once upon a time, there was a little dog named Spot. Spot had a terrible itch on his back. He tried to rub it, but he could not reach it.
Spot remembered that his friend, Cat, could help him. He went to Cat and asked, ""Can you help me rub my itch? It is terrible!"" Cat said, ""Yes, I can help you.""
Cat helped Spot rub the terrible itch, and it went away. Spot was very happy. He said, ""Thank you, Cat!"" They played together all day, and Spot never had a terrible itch again."
"One day, a little bird was soaring high in the sky. It had a pick in its beak and a powerful wings that could lift it up and down. The bird was searching for food for its nest. Suddenly it saw a mouse scurrying amongst the trees. 
The bird flew down and landed near the mouse. The mouse saw the bird and said, ""What do you have there?""
The bird replied, ""I have a pick. I'm using it to find food for my nest.""
The mouse smiled and said, ""That's very powerful! Here, you can use this.""
The mouse gave the bird an acorn. The bird was so happy and thanked the mouse. It soared off into the sky with the pick in its beak and the acorn in its claws. From then on, the little bird used the pick to find food and the acorn to eat.
The end."
"Tim and Lily were playing in the park with their mom. They saw a big deer with horns near the trees. Tim wanted to go and touch the deer, but Lily was scared.
""Deer are nice, they don't hurt you,"" Tim said. ""I dare you to go with me and pet the deer.""
Lily shook her head. ""No, Tim, deer are dangerous. They can run fast and kick you with their legs. Mom said we should not go near wild animals.""
Tim did not listen to Lily. He ran towards the deer, leaving Lily behind. He wanted to show Lily that he was brave and that deer were not dangerous.
But the deer did not like Tim. The deer saw Tim coming and felt scared. The deer thought Tim was a bad person who wanted to hurt him. The deer lowered his horns and charged at Tim.
Tim was very scared. He tried to run away, but the deer was faster. The deer caught up with Tim and pushed him with his horns. Tim fell to the ground and cried.
Lily and mom heard Tim's cry. They ran to help him. Mom scared the deer away with a loud shout. She picked up Tim and hugged him. She checked if he was hurt. He had a big bruise on his arm, but no blood.
""Tim, you were very foolish,"" mom said. ""You should never dare to go near a wild animal. They are dangerous and can hurt you. You are lucky the deer did not hurt you more. You should always listen to Lily and me.""
Tim felt sorry. He said sorry to mom and Lily. He learned his lesson. He never dared to go near a deer again. He played safely in the park with Lily and mom."
"Once upon a time, there was a green field. In the field, there was a camp. In the camp, there were two friends, Tom and Sue. They liked to play in the green field.
One day, Tom and Sue found some seeds. Tom said, ""Let's spread the seeds in the green field."" Sue said, ""Yes, and watch them grow."" So, they spread the seeds all around the camp.
After some time, pretty flowers grew in the green field. Tom and Sue were happy. They played near the flowers every day. The green field was now more beautiful than ever. And they lived happily in their camp."
"Once upon a time, there was a small cat named Tim. Tim loved to play outside on sunny days. One day, on a Tuesday, Tim went to the park to play with his friends.
Tim saw his friend, a dog named Max. Max asked, ""Do you want to play with me?"" Tim said, ""Yes!"" So, they played together. They chased each other and had lots of fun.
After a while, Tim said, ""I am tired, Max. Let's go home."" Max agreed. So, Tim led Max back to their homes. They walked and talked, happy to have spent the day together."
"Once upon a time, there was a messy fox. He lived in a big forest. The fox liked to store his toys and food in a big cave.
One day, the fox met a little bird. The little bird said, ""Mr. Fox, your cave is so messy! Can I help you clean it up?"" The fox said, ""Yes, please!""
The little bird and the fox worked together to clean the cave. They put all the toys and food in the right places. But then, something unexpected happened. The little bird found a big, shiny key!
The bird showed the key to the fox, and they decided to find out what it opened. They looked all around the forest until they found a hidden door in a big tree. The key opened the door, and inside they found a room full of fun toys and yummy food! The fox and the bird were so happy that they became best friends and played together every day."
"""Mommy, what's that?"" a young girl asked her mother, pointing to a sparkly statue of an angel on a shelf. She had never seen it before.
""That's an angel,"" her mother responded. ""It's here to remind us that we can always stay ready for anything that happens in life. Like when you're ready for school or for bedtime.""
The little girl nodded and smiled. But as the days passed, she seemed to be forgetting the special reminder from the angel. She forgot to brush her teeth before bedtime, she was late for morning kindergarten, and she got upset when her sister touched her toys.
Her mom decided to take action. She asked the little girl to look at the angel and reminded her of the angel's message. The little girl listened intently and smiled. She understood that she needed to be ready for each task and treat her sister with kindness.
The angel became an important reminder for the little girl and she made sure to remember each day to stay ready and be kind."
"Once upon a time, there was a helpful train named Tom. Tom loved to help his friends. He would always be there for them when they needed him. Tom worked on a track, and he was very good at it.
One day, as Tom was moving along the track, he heard his friend, the little bird named Sally, yell, ""Help!"" Sally was stuck in a tree, and she couldn't get down. Tom stopped and looked up at Sally. ""Don't worry, Sally! I will help you,"" he said.
Tom thought of a plan. He asked his friend, the big elephant named Ellie, to come and help. Ellie used her long nose to lift Sally out of the tree. But as they were celebrating, they heard a loud ""Crash!"" The tree had fallen onto Tom's track! Now, Tom couldn't move.
Sally and Ellie knew they had to help Tom. They worked together to lift the tree off the track. With a big push, they moved the tree, and Tom was free! Tom, Sally, and Ellie were so happy. They knew that they could always count on each other to help when something unexpected happened. And they lived happily ever after."
"Once upon a time, there was a pink bunny who lived in a big forest. The pink bunny loved to hop and play all day. One day, while hopping, the pink bunny found a new place. It was an oasis with lots of water and trees. The pink bunny was very happy and wanted to live there.
The pink bunny told all its friends about the oasis. The friends were happy too. They all went to the oasis to play and have fun. The pink bunny saw that the water in the oasis started to increase, but did not know why.
Then, something unexpected happened. A big, friendly elephant came out of the trees. The elephant said, ""Hello, I am the one who made the water increase. I wanted to make the oasis a better place for all of us to live and play."" The pink bunny and its friends were very happy and surprised. They all played together in the oasis and lived happily ever after."
"Once upon a time, there was a pirate named Tom. Tom liked to hop. He hopped on the tight ropes on his big boat. One day, he hopped to a new island. There, he found a big box. Tom was very happy.
Tom opened the big box. He thought he would find gold inside. But, there was no gold. Instead, there were many big, colorful balls. Tom was sad. He wanted gold, not balls.
But then, Tom had an idea. He took the balls to his boat. He hopped with the balls on the tight ropes. The balls made him hop even higher. Tom was not sad anymore. He was the best hopping pirate ever. And all the other pirates wanted to hop with Tom and his colorful balls."
"Tom and Lily were playing in the living room. They saw a big candle on the table. It was red and smelled nice. Tom wanted to touch it, but Lily stopped him.
""No, Tom, don't touch the candle. It is hot and can hurt you,"" Lily said.
""Why is it hot?"" Tom asked. He liked to question everything.
""Because it has fire inside. Fire makes light and heat, but it can also burn things,"" Lily explained.
""Where does fire come from?"" Tom asked again.
Lily thought for a moment. She did not know the answer. She decided to ask their mom, who was in the kitchen.
""Mom, where does fire come from?"" Lily called.
Mom came to the living room. She saw the candle and smiled.
""Fire comes from a match or a lighter. You need to strike them to make a spark. Then the spark catches the candle wick and makes fire. But you should never play with matches or lighters. They are dangerous,"" Mom said.
""Can we see how you make fire?"" Tom and Lily asked together.
Mom nodded. She took a match from a box and struck it on the side. A small flame appeared. She held it near the candle and lit it. The candle glowed brighter.
""Wow, that's amazing!"" Tom and Lily said.
Mom blew out the match and put it back in the box. She told Tom and Lily to be careful around the candle and not to touch it. She said it was a rare candle that their grandma gave them for Christmas. It had a special scent that reminded her of home.
Tom and Lily looked at the candle with wonder. They smelled the nice scent and felt the warmth. They thanked Mom for showing them how to make fire. They learned something new and had fun."
"One day, a little boy named Tim found a trumpet. He was very happy. He wanted to play the trumpet and make music. But when he tried to play it, the sound was terrible. Tim was sad.
Tim's friend, Sue, came to play. She heard the terrible sound and asked, ""What is that?"" Tim showed her the trumpet. Sue had a surprise idea. ""Let's ask my dad for help,"" she said. They went to Sue's house to see her dad.
Sue's dad knew how to play the trumpet. He showed Tim how to play it the right way. Tim tried again, and this time, the sound was beautiful. Tim and Sue were so happy. They played the trumpet together all day, and the terrible sound was gone."
"Once upon a time, in a small house, there was a boy named Tim. Tim had a different toy. It was a glass ball. He liked to play with it all day.
One day, Tim's mom said, ""Tim, do not play with the glass ball in the house. It can break."" Tim said, ""Okay, mom."" But Tim played with the glass ball in the house when his mom was not looking.
The glass ball broke. Tim was sad. His mom found out and said, ""Tim, I told you not to play with the glass ball in the house. Now you must be punished."" Tim had to clean up the broken glass and say sorry to his mom.
From that day on, Tim learned to listen to his mom. He never played with a glass ball in the house again."
"One day, a big group of friends wanted to organize a fun festival. They all worked together to make it happen. They put up tents, made yummy food, and played happy music. Everyone was excited and couldn't wait for the festival to start.
When the festival began, people came from all over to have fun. But then, something unexpected happened! A little dog, who looked helpless, walked into the festival. The dog looked lost and sad. A little girl named Lily saw the dog and said, ""Oh no! This dog needs help.""
Lily and her friends decided to help the little dog. They asked people at the festival if they knew who the dog belonged to. To their surprise, the dog belonged to a kind old man who lived nearby. The old man was so happy to see his dog again, and he thanked the kids for their help. In the end, the festival was a big success and everyone had a great time, including the little dog and the old man."
"One day, a little girl named Lucy went for a walk. She saw a big house with a rich, shiny door. Lucy wanted to see who lived there. She took a step up to the door and knocked.
A nice lady appeared at the door. She said, ""Hello, my name is Mrs. Smith. What can I do for you?"" Lucy said, ""I just wanted to say hi and see your pretty house.""
Mrs. Smith smiled and said, ""Thank you, Lucy. Would you like to come in and have some cookies?"" Lucy said, ""Yes, please!"" So, Lucy and Mrs. Smith became friends and had a fun day together."
"Once upon a time, a nice pilot named Tom lived near a big blue sky. Tom loved to fly his fast plane up and down, left and right. One day, he wanted to visit his good friend, Sam, who lived far away.
Tom got into his plane and flew high in the sky. He saw many sweet birds flying with him. They sang happy songs as they flew. Tom smiled and waved at the birds. He knew he was close to Sam's house.
When Tom arrived, Sam was very happy to see him. They played fun games and ate yummy food together. After a long day of laughing and playing, Tom said goodbye to Sam. He flew back home, with the sweet birds singing beside him."
"Once upon a time, there was a lady who loved the color red. She had a red hat, a red dress, and red shoes. She lived in a red house with her red cat. One day, she wanted to celebrate her birthday with her friends.
She sent out red invites to all her friends. On the day of her birthday, her friends came to her red house. They saw the red lady and her red cat. ""Hello, red lady!"" said her friend, Tom. ""Happy birthday! We love your red house and red cat!""
""Thank you, Tom!"" said the red lady. They all played games, ate cake, and had fun at the party. The red lady was so happy to celebrate her birthday with her friends. At the end of the day, they all said goodbye and went home. The red lady and her red cat went to bed, happy and tired from their fun day."
"One day, Ella was walking through the park. She was feeling a bit worried. Suddenly she heard a loud snap. When she looked around, she saw a tree in the middle of the park had snapped in two. She looked closer and saw a monkey hiding in the temple in the tree.
The monkey was even more worried than Ella. He looked scared and wanted to get away quickly. Ella was very kind and helped the monkey out of the temple. She gave him a hug and he scampered away. 
Ella was happy she could help the frightened monkey. She continued walking through the park with a smile on her face."
"Once upon a time, in a small garden, there was a big, round pumpkin. It was friends with all the other plants. One day, a tiny seed came to the garden. The seed was bitter because it felt too small.
The pumpkin said, ""Hello, little seed. Why are you so bitter?"" The seed replied, ""I am too small. I want to be big and strong like you.""
The pumpkin smiled and said, ""Don't worry, little seed. Just remain here, and you will grow big and strong too."" The seed listened to the pumpkin and remained in the garden. The sun shone, and the rain fell. The seed grew into a beautiful flower.
The flower and the pumpkin became best friends. They were happy together in the garden. And the little flower was not bitter anymore."
"Once upon a time there was a very brave little girl called Daisy who was always curious about the world around her. One day, Daisy was walking in the park when she spotted something shiny by a tree. She took a closer look and saw it was a battery. She had never seen one before and was excited to examine it.
Daisy picked up the battery and began to look at it carefully. She was amazed at how small and shiny it was. Suddenly, a loud noise from behind startled her and Daisy let out a shriek.
""Don't be so frightened, Daisy,"" said her mom, who had come up behind her. ""I'm right here, everything is ok.""
Daisy calmed down and looked up at her mom. She smiled.
Then, Daisy handed the battery to her mom and said, ""Mommy, can you help me examine this?""
Her mom laughed and said, ""Yes, of course I can help you examine it. Let's see what it does!"""
"Lily and Ben were friends who liked to play outside. They had a big plan for today. They wanted to go to the sea and build a sand castle. They packed their buckets, shovels and hats and asked their moms to take them to the beach.
When they got to the sea, they saw many waves and shells and birds. They ran to the sand and started to dig and pile. They made a big wall and a tower and a door. They were very happy with their castle.
But then, a big wave came and washed away their castle. Lily and Ben were sad and angry. They cried and shouted.
""Why did the sea do that?"" Lily asked.
""The sea is tough and strong. It does not care about our castle,"" Ben said.
""Can we make another one?"" Lily asked.
""Maybe, but we have to be tough and strong too. We have to find a better spot and work harder,"" Ben said.
They wiped their tears and looked around. They saw a big rock near the water. They decided to build their castle behind the rock. They hoped the rock would protect their castle from the waves.
They worked hard and made a new castle. It was bigger and better than the first one. They decorated it with shells and seaweed. They were very proud of their castle.
They smiled and hugged each other. They had a good plan and they were tough and strong. They had fun at the sea."
"Once upon a time, in a small house, there was a weak, old man. He lived all alone. One day, he saw a big cobweb in the corner of his room. He did not like it, so he tried to clean it.
As he tried to clean the cobweb, a little spider came down. The old man stopped and began to watch the spider. The spider was very small and was trying to fix the cobweb. The old man felt bad for the spider.
The old man decided to let the spider stay and fix the cobweb. They became friends. The old man would watch the spider work on the cobweb every day. They were both happy and not alone anymore."
"Once upon a time, there was a little girl named Lily. She liked to move around and play with her toys. One day, she found a fragile toy. It was a small, pretty butterfly. She wanted to show it to her friends.
Lily went to the park with the butterfly. There, she saw her friends: Tom, Sam, and Mia. They were playing together in a network of ropes. The ropes were fun to climb and swing on. Lily called out to her friends, ""Look at my new toy! It's a butterfly!""
Her friends came over to see the butterfly. They knew it was fragile, so they were very careful. They took turns holding it and playing with it. They had a great time together, sharing and enjoying Lily's new toy.
After a while, it was time to go home. Lily put the fragile butterfly back in its box. She was happy that she could share her toy with her friends. They all said goodbye and went back to their houses. Lily knew that they would have more fun the next time they played together."
"The woman was impatient. She set her heavy bag down on the ground and wiped her forehead. She had been walking for hours. 
Suddenly, she spotted a large tree. Excitedly, she went over to it and set down her belongings under the shade. The woman was so happy that she was able to finally settle down in one place. 
For a moment, she watched the birds hovering above her in the sky as she sat against the tree. She felt peaceful and content. 
Suddenly, she heard a noise. When she looked around, she saw a little girl standing beside her, looking curiously at the woman. The woman smiled at the girl and asked her name. The little girl said her name was Sally. They soon become great friends. 
The woman taught Sally how to make a daisy chain while they continued to settle under the tree. They both spent the rest of the day laughing and playing together."
"Once upon a time, in a small, organized town, there lived a little girl named Amy. Amy loved to taste new foods with her big nose. She would smell the food first, and then taste it. Her friends liked to watch her try new things. 
One day, Amy and her friends went to the park to play. They found a big, red apple on the ground. Amy wanted to taste it, but her friend Tom said, ""Wait! We don't know where it came from."" Amy didn't listen and took a big bite. Suddenly, she felt funny and her nose grew bigger and bigger!
Amy was sad and scared. Her friends helped her find a wise old lady in the town. The old lady told Amy that she must learn to listen to her friends and not be so quick to taste new things. Amy promised to be more careful. The old lady gave her a special drink, and her nose went back to normal size. From that day on, Amy always listened to her friends and was more careful with what she tasted."
"Once upon a time, there lived a princess. The princess had a very fancy crystal. Everywhere she went, she brought it with her, and people admired it. 
One day, the princess was walking in the forest and she heard a noise. It was a little voice crying. She walked closer and saw a little rabbit. The rabbit was sad and crying. 
The princess was kind and said, ""Welcome, little rabbit. What is wrong?"" 
The rabbit replied, ""I don't have my home anymore and I'm lost."" 
The princess smiled and said, ""Don't worry. I will help you. Here, take my fancy crystal and it will keep you safe."" 
The rabbit was so happy and touched by the princess's kindness, it began to hop around in joy. 
The princess smiled and said, ""Welcome to my kingdom. I'm sure you'll be very happy here."" 
The little rabbit and the princess became very good friends, and the crystal became a symbol of their friendship."
"Once upon a time, in a small village, there was a little boy named Tim. Tim loved to play outside. One day, while playing near the river, he found a pretty pebble. It was smooth and shiny.
Tim picked up the pebble and showed it to his friend, Sally. ""Look at my pretty pebble,"" he said. ""It is so shiny!"" Sally smiled and said, ""Wow, it is very nice! Let's be good and behave while we play with it.""
Tim and Sally played with the pebble all day. They took turns holding it, and they even put it in the river to see if it would float. It didn't, but it still looked shiny and pretty when they took it out. They played with the pebble until it was time to go home.
When Tim got home, his mom saw the pebble and said, ""That is a pretty pebble, Tim! It is good to play outside and be healthy."" Tim smiled and said, ""Yes, mom, I had a lot of fun with Sally today. We behaved and played with the pebble all day.""
From that day on, Tim and Sally played with the pebble every day. They always behaved and had lots of fun, and they grew up to be healthy and happy."
"Once upon a time there was a charming boy. He had a very special mission - to search for the world's biggest mustache! 
Every day the boy would get up and search for the mustache. But no matter where he looked, he couldn't find it. He searched in the woods, in the rivers, and in the sea. He even searched in the clouds - but still couldn't find the huge mustache. 
Then one day, while the boy was searching through some tall grass, he stumbled upon a big and hairy mustache. It was the world's biggest mustache! 
The boy had found his mustache! He was so happy and excited. He quickly ran home and told his whole family all about it! They were so proud of him. 
The end."
"Once upon a time, there was a little girl named Mia. She was only three years old and very curious. Today, she wanted to try something new.
Mia asked her mom, ""Can I try some cereal?"" Her mom nodded and said, ""Yes, go ahead.""
Mia was very excited. She opened a box of cereal and saw that it was clear. She said, ""I don't understand. What is this?"" Her mom smiled and told her, ""It's cereal, sweetheart. You pour it into a bowl, add some milk, and enjoy it.""
Mia was so excited that she jumped up and down. She quickly poured the cereal into the bowl, added some delicious milk, and enjoyed her snack. She smiled and said, ""Yummy!"""
"Once upon a time there was a lucky bear named Pat. Pat never had enough money and always wanted more. One day he had an idea. He asked a nearby duck to lend him some money.
The duck agreed and gave Pat some coins. Pat was so excited and he couldn't wait to buy something tasty with it. So he went to a bakery and picked out a delicious pastry.
Before Pat could eat his pastry, a tiny mouse ran up to him and asked if he could have a bite. Pat felt bad for the mouse so he lent a piece of his pastry.
Sure enough, soon after the mouse left, Pat bumped into an old friend. His friend had won a big prize in a game of chance, and he gave Pat a lot of money. Pat was so lucky!
The very next day, Pat came across the same mouse again. But this time the mouse had found some money and was able to buy his own pastry. Pat and the mouse celebrated with smiles and laughter.
The moral of the story is that when you lend a helping hand, you might just get a lucky reward."
"Once upon a time, in a small town, there was a humble guard. The guard had a big hat and a shiny badge. He loved to help people and keep them safe. Every day, he walked up and down the streets, making sure everyone was happy.
One sunny day, while the guard was walking, he saw a little cat stuck in a tree. The cat was scared and wanted to come down. The guard tried to help the cat, but he was not tall enough to reach it. So, he called his friend, the tall man, to help.
When the tall man came, he tried to reach the cat, but he couldn't. Then, something unexpected happened. The cat jumped down from the tree all by itself! The guard and the tall man were surprised. They laughed and clapped. The cat was safe, and they all became good friends."
"Once upon a time, there was a quick bunny named Ben. Ben lived in a small house in the woods. His house was very dull, but Ben did not mind. He loved to hop around the woods and play with his friends.
One day, Ben found a broken toy car. He wanted to restore it, so he could play with it. Ben asked his friend, the wise old owl, ""How can I fix this toy car?""
The wise old owl said, ""Find the missing wheel and put it back on. Then, your toy car will be as good as new.""
Ben searched the woods and found the missing wheel. He put it back on the toy car, and it was no longer broken. Ben was very happy. He played with his restored toy car all day long with his friends. The once dull house was now full of fun and laughter."
"One day, a boy named Tim and his mom went to the beach. It was a sunny day and they wanted to play in the sand. Tim's mom gave him a huge bucket to fill with sand.
Tim started to fill the bucket with sand. A little crab came up to him and said, ""Can you help me raise my house? The waves washed it away."" Tim looked at the crab and said, ""Okay, let's build you a new house.""
They worked together to build the crab a new house. When they were done, the crab said, ""Thank you, Tim!"" Just then, a big wave came and washed away the crab's new house. The crab was sad, but Tim had an idea. He put the crab in his huge bucket and they built the house inside it. This time, the waves couldn't wash it away. The crab was happy and Tim's mom was proud of him for helping his new friend."
"Once upon a time there was a kind old lady. She loved to deliver special treats to the children in her town.
One day, the kind old lady decided to deliver a surprise. She had a big brown bag and inside the bag was a special leaf. The leaf was green and crispy.
When the children saw the leaf, they were so happy. They all cheered and clapped.
The kids thanked the kind old lady and they each took turns giving her big hugs. The kind old lady was so happy. 
She waved goodbye and went on her way. Everyone was so happy to have been given such a special surprise."
"Once upon a time there were two best friends, a bunny and a bird. They loved to go on adventures together. 
One day, the bunny and the bird spotted a pretty bridge! They decided to cross the bridge and go on an adventure on the other side. 
But when they got to the other side, they found a big lake. The bunny and the bird saw that the bridge was the only way back home. 
The bird said, ""How are we going to get back home? We can't swim!"" 
Suddenly, the bunny had an idea. He said, ""Let's both close our eyes, flap our arms and take three hops at the same time. We can complete our bridge by doing this!""
So the bunny and the bird did as the bunny said. They closed their eyes, flapped their arms and hopped three times. When they opened their eyes, they saw that the lake was all gone! 
The bunny and the bird were so excited! The best friends had completed a new, pretty bridge and now they could go back home."
"Once upon a time, there was a little boy named Tim. He was very enthusiastic about learning new words. One day, he went to school and his teacher gave him a new word to learn. The word was ""sit"". Tim was so excited to learn this new word.
At home, Tim tried to teach his dog, Max, the new word. He said, ""Sit, Max, sit!"" But Max did not sit. He just looked at Tim and wagged his tail. Tim tried again and again, but Max would not sit. Tim was sad and did not know what to do.
Tim's mom saw him and said, ""Don't worry, Tim. Let's try together."" Tim and his mom both said, ""Sit, Max, sit!"" This time, Max sat down! Tim was so happy that Max learned the new word. They all clapped and Max wagged his tail. Tim was proud that he could teach Max the new word, and they all lived happily ever after."
"Once upon a time, there was a big, colorful earth. On this earth, there were many animals. They all liked to share and play together. They shared their food and toys with each other. The earth was a happy place.
One day, a new animal came to the earth. He did not like to share. He took all the food and toys for himself. The other animals were sad. They did not have anything to eat or play with.
The animals tried to talk to the new animal. They asked him to share with them. But the new animal did not listen. He kept all the things for himself. The earth became a sad place. The animals were not happy anymore. The colorful earth was not colorful anymore."
"Tom and Lily are playing in the garden. They see a cricket on the grass. Tom wants to catch the cricket and put it in a jar. Lily wants to let the cricket go and watch it hop.
""Look, a cricket!"" Tom says. He runs to the cricket and tries to grab it with his hand.
""No, Tom, don't!"" Lily says. She runs after Tom and tries to stop him. ""The cricket is not a toy. It wants to be free.""
Tom and Lily tug and pull at each other. The cricket jumps away and hides under a leaf.
""Ha, you missed it!"" Lily says. She sticks out her tongue at Tom.
Tom is angry. He pushes Lily and makes her fall on the wet grass. Lily starts to cry.
""Hey, that's not nice!"" a voice says. It is Mom. She comes out of the house and sees Tom and Lily. ""What are you doing?""
""Tom wanted to catch the cricket and I wanted to let it go,"" Lily says. She points at Tom. ""He pushed me and made me wet.""
Mom frowns at Tom. ""Tom, you know you should not hurt your sister or the cricket. They are both living things and they have feelings. How would you like it if someone pushed you and made you wet?""
Tom feels sorry. He knows Mom is right. He looks at Lily and sees her tears. He goes to her and says, ""I'm sorry, Lily. I was wrong. I don't want to catch the cricket anymore. I want to be your friend.""
Lily smiles and hugs Tom. ""It's okay, Tom. I forgive you. I want to be your friend too.""
Mom smiles and hugs them both. ""That's good, Tom and Lily. I'm proud of you. Now, why don't we go inside and have some cookies and milk?""
Tom and Lily nod and follow Mom. They leave the cricket alone and let it hop in the garden."
"Once upon a time, there was a little boy named Tim. He was very eager to go to his friend's house. Tim wanted to play with his friend's toys. He waited for his mom to say, ""We can go now.""
When they arrived at the friend's house, Tim saw many toys. There was a toy car and a toy train. Tim was very happy. He wanted to play with all the toys. His friend showed him a new toy. It was a measure. Tim did not know what it was.
Tim and his friend played with the measure. They used it to see how long things were. They measured the toy car and the toy train. But then, Tim pulled the measure too hard. It broke into two pieces. Tim's friend was sad, and Tim felt bad. They could not play with the measure anymore."
"One day, a little boy named Tim went to the park. He saw a big zip wire there. Tim was very excited. He ran to the zip wire and said, ""I want to play on this!""
Tim's mom helped him get on the zip wire. Tim was having so much fun. He went up and down, and up and down. Then, a little bird flew by and said, ""Hello, Tim! Can I play too?""
Tim said, ""Yes, come play with me on the zip wire!"" The bird tried to hold on to the zip wire, but it was too hard. The bird had a yummy cookie in its beak. It dropped the cookie, and it fell right into Tim's lap!
Tim was so surprised! He said, ""Thank you, bird!"" He shared the yummy cookie with the bird. They both laughed and enjoyed the cookie together. From that day on, Tim and the bird were best friends."
"One morning, a little boy named Tim woke up. He felt terrible. His nose was runny, and he did not want to go outside and play. His mom saw that he was not feeling well. She said, ""Tim, let's stay inside today.""
Tim and his mom stayed in the warm house. They played with toys and read books. But Tim's nose kept running. His mom gave him a soft cloth to wipe his nose.
Then, something unexpected happened. A tiny, talking mouse came out from behind the toy box. The mouse said, ""I can make you feel better, Tim!"" The mouse touched Tim's nose, and suddenly, Tim was not terrible anymore. He thanked the mouse, and they all played together for the rest of the day."
"One day, a little bird wanted to fly high in the sky. The bird had a friend named Tim. Tim was a bald boy who loved to play outside. The bird and Tim liked to play together at the park near their homes.
""Let's go to the mine today!"" said Tim. The bird liked the mine because it was big and dark. They walked to the mine and saw a big rock. They played a game to see who could jump the highest.
The bird jumped and started to fly in the air. ""Wow, you can fly so high!"" said Tim. The bird felt happy and proud. They played all day until it was time to go home.
At the end of the day, the bird and Tim said goodbye. ""I had fun today,"" said Tim. ""Me too,"" said the bird. They promised to play together again soon."
"Once upon a time, there was a deer named Danny. Danny was a great deer. He had many friends in the forest. One day, he met a new friend named Timmy the turtle.
Timmy said, ""Danny, I like to eat the green plants in the forest, but I can't resist the sweet red berries. They are not good for me, but they taste so yummy!"" Danny thought for a moment and said, ""Timmy, we should eat good food to be strong and healthy.""
So, Danny and Timmy went to find green plants to eat. They ate and ate until they were full. They were happy and healthy. They played and had fun all day long.
From that day on, Timmy learned to resist the sweet red berries. He ate only good food to be strong and healthy like his friend Danny. The moral of the story is to eat good food and resist things that are not good for you, so you can stay strong and healthy."
"One day, a big dog and a little cat had a meeting. They wanted to be friends and play together. They talked and said, ""We can be friends and have fun!"" They were very happy and felt peaceful.
But, they did not know how to play together. The dog was too big, and the cat was too small. They tried to play ball, but the cat could not manage to catch it. They tried to play hide and seek, but the dog could not manage to hide.
Then, something unexpected happened. A bird flew down and said, ""I can help you play together!"" The bird showed them how to play a new game. The dog, the cat, and the bird all played together and had fun. They were very happy and felt peaceful."
"One day, a girl named Lily went with her mom to the subway. They wanted to go to the park. Lily was very happy. She asked her mom, ""What is this place?"" Her mom tried to explain, ""This is a subway. It is like a big car that goes under the ground. We can go to the park fast.""
When they got on the subway, they saw a man with a big bag. He looked bad. Lily was scared. Her mom said, ""It's okay, he is just a man with a bag."" But then, the man opened his bag and something unexpected happened.
Out of the bag came lots of balloons and toys! The bad man was not bad at all. He was a nice man who liked to make kids happy. He gave Lily a balloon and said, ""I hope you have fun at the park!"" Lily and her mom smiled and thanked the nice man. They had a great day at the park."
"Once upon a time, there lived a brave boy called Jack. He was very kind, and he always tried to help others. One day, he saw a pole poking out of a bush. Curious, he decided to take a closer look. 
He carefully poked the pole with his finger, and to his surprise, it started to move! Suddenly, a giant monster came out of the bush and roared at him! The brave boy was scared, but he did not give up. He quickly grabbed the pole and bravely shouted at the monster. The monster was so surprised, it ran away.
Jack had saved the day! He was very proud of himself. He cheered and yelled out ""Yay!"" Then, he raised the pole high in the air and said to himself, ""I am brave!"""
"Once upon a time, in a big jungle, there lived a colorful rhinoceros named Remy. Remy was very friendly and loved to play with his friends. One day, Remy was feeling very tired and wanted to relax.
Remy saw a big tree with soft grass under it. He thought it would be a nice place to relax. Just as he was about to lay down, his friend, a little bird named Benny, came flying by. Benny saw Remy and said, ""Hi Remy! Do you want to play with me?""
Remy replied, ""Not now, Benny. I am very tired. I want to relax under this tree."" Benny understood and said, ""Okay, Remy. I will play with you later when you are not tired.""
Remy smiled and said, ""Thank you, Benny."" Remy then lay down on the soft grass and closed his eyes. He felt the warm sun on his colorful skin and listened to the gentle sounds of the jungle. Soon, Remy was fast asleep, feeling happy and relaxed."
"Once upon a time, there was a little girl named Amy. Amy loved to play with her toy car. One day, she decided to build a loop for her toy car to jump through. She was very ready to try it out.
Amy tried to make her toy car jump through the loop, but it didn't work. She tried again and again, but her toy car just couldn't succeed. Amy was sad and didn't know what to do.
Then, Amy's big brother Tom came to help. He showed her how to make the loop bigger and stronger. Together, they tried one more time. This time, the toy car jumped through the loop! Amy was so happy that they succeeded."
"Once upon a time, there was a hot day. The sun was very bright. A big fog came to the town. The people in the town did not like the fog. They wanted to send the fog away.
A little boy named Tim had a big fan. He thought, ""I can use my fan to send the fog away!"" So, Tim went outside and started to wave his fan at the fog. The fog started to move a little bit.
Tim waved his fan harder and harder. The fog went away more and more. The people in the town were happy. The sun came back, and the hot day was bright again. The town thanked Tim for sending the fog away."
"Once upon a time there was a small girl called Lucy who loved to go explore. One day, she stumbled upon a glittering jewel that sparkled like the sun! She was so excited that she couldn't contain her joy. 
""What is it?"" said Lucy. She squinted her eyes to take a closer look. 
Suddenly, there was a funny sound coming from the jewel. ""Hello!"" the jewel said. Lucy was very surprised but she was still excited! 
The jewel explained that he was a deaf fairy and needed help. Lucy said she would help him, so he waved his magic wand. Suddenly, the deaf fairy was able to hear! 
The deaf fairy was so thankful for Lucy's help that he gave her a big hug and flew away. She waved goodbye and ran home, feeling very proud and happy!"
"Once upon a time, there was a boy named Tim. Tim had a toy car that he loved to play with. One day, Tim was careless and left his toy car on the floor. The toy car had a cable that helped it go fast. Tim's mom told him to be careful and always pick up his toys.
The next day, Tim's mom was walking in the room. She did not see the toy car and its cable on the floor. She stepped on the cable and fell down. Tim's mom was very sad because she got hurt.
Tim felt bad and said sorry to his mom. He promised to be more careful and pick up his toys. But then, something unexpected happened. Tim's mom found a big toy store gift card under the toy car! Tim and his mom were so happy. They went to the toy store and got more fun toys to play with. From that day on, Tim always picked up his toys and was never careless again."
"One day, a little girl named Lily found a big, powerful lollipop. She was so happy and wanted to try it right away. She held the lollipop in her hand and looked at its bright colors. It was the biggest lollipop she had ever seen.
Lily started to lick the lollipop, and it tasted so good. She walked around with her powerful lollipop, showing it to her friends. They all wanted to try it, too. But Lily wanted to keep it all to herself.
Then, something unexpected happened. The powerful lollipop started to talk! It told Lily that it could make her fly if she shared it with her friends. Lily was surprised, but she decided to try. She broke the lollipop into small pieces and gave some to her friends. And just like the lollipop said, they all started to fly! They laughed and played in the sky, all because Lily shared her powerful lollipop."
"Once upon a time, there was a little boy named Tim. He had a toy called thermometer. He liked to play with it all day. One day, Tim found a smelly sock in his room. He didn't like the smell, so he decided to play outside.
Tim took his thermometer and went to the park. There, he saw a big tree. He wanted to record how tall the tree was with his thermometer. He tried to reach the tree, but it was too high.
As he was trying to measure the tree, a big wind came. The wind blew the smelly sock right into Tim's face. Tim was sad because he couldn't record the tree and the smelly sock made him feel yucky. So, he went back home with a sad face and a bad ending to his day."
"One day, a little boy named Tim went outside to play. He saw a small cat on his porch. The cat was hungry, so Tim wanted to help. He went inside his home and found some tasty food for the cat.
Tim said to the cat, ""Here is some food for you. I hope you like it."" The cat ate the tasty food and was very happy. Tim felt good because he helped the cat.
After eating, the cat stayed with Tim. They played together on the porch and had lots of fun. Tim loved his new friend, and the cat loved Tim too. They had a great day together."
"Once upon a time there were two friends, Sarah and Aiden. They were both three years old and were at the beach together. It was a hot day and Sarah wore a pretty purple dress.
""I love your dress, Sarah,"" said Aiden. 
""Thank you,"" said Sarah. ""It's my favourite.""
Suddenly, Sarah noticed something strange. Some of the sand was moving! She saw a strange creature with yellow eyes and a long pointed nose.
""What is that?"" asked Sarah. 
""It is a sandcat,"" said Aiden. ""They like to eat fashion, but they don't like it when people touch them.""
Sarah was so excited. She wanted to remove the sandcat, but Aiden stopped her.
""That's stupid,"" said Aiden. ""If you touch it, it might bite you.""
So Sarah stayed back, but she still felt happy that she had seen a sandcat."
"One day, a big black dog went to the park. He saw a little girl in a red dress. The girl said, ""Hi, dog! Can you perform a trick?"" The dog wanted to show the girl a trick, but he knew the law said dogs must stay on a leash.
The dog's owner, a nice man, walked over and said, ""Don't worry, dog! I will hold your leash, and you can perform a trick for the girl."" The black dog was happy and did a big jump. The girl clapped and laughed.
Suddenly, a big wind came and blew the girl's red dress away. The black dog, still on his leash, ran fast and caught the dress in his mouth. The girl was so happy and said, ""Thank you, dog! You are my hero!"" The dog felt proud that he could help, even with the leash law."
"One day, a little dog named Spot was playing outside. He saw a big, clean tire and decided to play with it. He pushed the tire with his nose and it started to roll.
Spot and the tire rolled down the hill. The tire went faster and faster. Spot was having fun, but he started to feel tired. He wanted to stop, but the tire kept going.
At the bottom of the hill, there was a big, muddy puddle. Spot and the tire splashed into the puddle. Spot was very dirty and sad. The fun day had a bad ending."
"Once upon a time, there was a little girl named Sue. Sue loved strawberries. One day, she went to the garden to pick some strawberries.
In the garden, she saw a little rabbit. The rabbit said, ""Hello, Sue. Can I have a strawberry, please?"" Sue said, ""Okay, little rabbit. You can have one strawberry."" The rabbit felt happy and ate the strawberry.
But then, a big bird came and took away the little rabbit. Sue felt sad because she lost her new friend. She went back home without any strawberries."
"Once upon a time, there was a big ship. The ship had many open doors. In one room, there were many things that match. There were red balls that match red cups, blue hats that match blue shoes, and yellow shirts that match yellow pants.
One day, a little boy named Tim went on the ship. He wanted to find his match. He looked at the red balls and the red cups, but they did not match him. He looked at the blue hats and the blue shoes, but they did not match him either. He looked at the yellow shirts and the yellow pants, but they still did not match him.
Then, something unexpected happened. Tim found a big box in a corner of the room. He opened the box and saw many colors inside. He saw green, orange, and purple things. Tim was so happy because he found his match. He put on a green hat, an orange shirt, and purple shoes. Tim was not like the other things on the ship. He was special and different. And that made him very happy."
"Once upon a time, in a small town, there was a big ancient tree. The tree was very old and had a long rope hanging from it. The children loved to play with the rope and swing on it.
One day, Tim and Sue wanted to play on the rope at the same time. ""It's my turn,"" said Tim. ""No, it's my turn,"" said Sue. They both wanted to play, but they did not want to share. They started to argue and push each other.
A wise old owl, who lived in the tree, saw the children fighting. The owl flew down and said, ""Stop fighting! Today is a special day to celebrate. It is the tree's birthday! Instead of fighting, you should play together and have fun.""
Tim and Sue looked at each other and decided to stop fighting. They took turns on the rope and played together. They even sang ""Happy Birthday"" to the ancient tree. From that day on, they always shared and played nicely together. The tree, the owl, and the children were all very happy."
"Once upon a time, there was an ordinary trumpet. It was very sad because it could only make one sound. One day, the trumpet met a magic bird. The bird said, ""I can change your sound, so you can make many sounds.""
The trumpet was very happy and said, ""Please change my sound!"" The bird flew away and came back with a magic seed. The bird put the seed inside the trumpet. The trumpet felt something change inside.
The next day, the trumpet tried to make a sound. It made many different sounds! The trumpet was so happy that it could change its sounds. The magic bird had helped the ordinary trumpet become special. And they lived happily ever after."
"One day, a boy named Tim went on a journey. He wanted to test how good he was at finding things. He took a big bag to put all the things he found in it.
As Tim walked, he found a big red ball, a small green frog, and a soft blue hat. He felt so good and happy. But then, something unexpected happened. The big red ball began to grow bigger and bigger!
Tim was very surprised. The big red ball was now so big that it lifted him up into the sky. Tim held onto the ball tightly. He saw his house, his friends, and the park from up high. He felt like he was on a new journey in the sky.
At last, the big red ball started to get smaller. Tim went down, down, down and landed back on the ground. He was back with his friends and they all laughed. Tim's journey was over, but he had a good story to tell. And he knew he was good at finding things, even if they were a little bit unexpected."
"One day, a woman went to the store. She had a difficult time remembering what she needed to buy. She saw a little boy and asked him, ""Can you help remind me what I need to buy?"" The little boy said, ""Yes, I can help you.""
They walked around the store together. The woman saw some apples and the little boy said, ""You need apples!"" The woman thanked him and put the apples in her bag. Then, they saw some bread and the little boy said, ""You need bread too!"" The woman smiled and put the bread in her bag.
Suddenly, the little boy's mom came up to them. She was surprised to see her son helping the woman. The mom said, ""I didn't know you could help people remember things!"" The little boy laughed and said, ""I'm good at reminding!"" The woman was very happy and thanked the little boy and his mom for their help."
"Once upon a time, there was a large toy car. The car needed a battery to go fast. A boy named Tim had the car. Tim loved to play with his large toy car every day.
One day, Tim could not find the battery. He asked his mom, ""Mom, where is the battery for my car?"" His mom did not hear him at first. Tim asked again, ""Mom, have you seen my battery?"" His mom said, ""I think it is in the toy box.""
Tim went to the toy box and found the battery. He put it in his large toy car. The car started to go very fast. Tim was very happy.
He played with the car all day long. Tim's mom could hear the car zooming around the house. She was happy that Tim was having fun with his large toy car. And they lived happily ever after."
"Once upon a time, there was a young girl named Mona. Mona was 3-years-old and loved to explore the world around her.
One day, Mona's mommy said, ""Let's go for a walk outside and get some fresh air!"" Mona was so excited that she ran out the door and started to explore.
As Mona walked, she saw a nice suit in the shop window. It was pink, with sparkly stars. Mona asked her mommy, ""Can I try it on?"".
Mona's mommy said yes and she put on the suit. It was snug and the perfect fit. Mona smiled and started to twirl in her new suit. She was so happy!
Suddenly, Mona started to yawn. She was getting a bit sleepy! Mona's mommy said, ""It's time for bed now, let's go home and rest."" 
Mona said goodnight to her suit and yawned again as she went home. Mona went to sleep, content and happy in her young explorations."
"Once upon a time, there was a big bear named Bob. Bob loved to wear his red suit. It was his favorite suit. He wore it every day. One day, Bob went to a party. There were lots of friends, food, and games.
At the party, Bob saw a big box. It was wrapped with a pretty bow. Bob was very excited to open it. His friends said, ""Wait, Bob! It's not your turn."" But Bob did not listen. He opened the box and found a big cake inside.
Bob wanted to eat the cake, but he was too fast. He dropped the cake on his red suit. The cake was all over his suit. Bob was very sad. His friends said, ""Bob, you should have waited. Now your suit is spoiled."" Bob learned that he should wait for his turn and not be too fast."
"Once upon a time, there was a little boy named Tim. Tim was a troubled boy because he was scared of the big closet in his room. He thought that there were monsters inside it. Every night, he would look at the closet and feel very scared.
One day, Tim's mom had to deliver a big box to the house next door. She asked Tim to come with her. Tim saw that the big box was going into a closet, just like the one in his room. He asked his mom, ""Why does the big box go in the closet?""
His mom said, ""The box has toys for the kids next door. The closet is a safe place to keep them until they are ready to play."" Tim thought about it and decided that maybe his closet wasn't so scary after all.
That night, Tim looked at his closet and said, ""I know you're not scary. You're just a place to keep things safe."" He felt better and went to sleep. From that day on, Tim was no longer troubled by the closet in his room."
"One day, a boy named Tim was very hungry. He wanted a big pizza for lunch. He asked his mom to make the pizza. His mom said, ""Okay, but you must be patient and wait.""
Tim was patient and played with his toys. But then, something unexpected happened. A big, soft bear came into the house. The bear was hungry too. Tim wanted to help the bear, so he tried to comfort the bear by giving him a toy.
But the bear did not want a toy. The bear wanted pizza too. Tim's mom saw the bear and had an idea. She made a big pizza for Tim and a big pizza for the bear. They all sat and ate pizza together. The bear was happy, and Tim made a new friend."
"One day, a furry cat named Tom went to the park. Tom liked to create noise by running and playing with his friends. They loved to chase each other and jump in the leaves. The park was a fun place for Tom and his friends.
One sunny day, as Tom was playing with his friends, he heard a strange noise. It was not like the noise he and his friends made. Tom was curious, so he went to find out what the noise was. He followed the noise and saw a big box.
Tom looked inside the box and saw a little bird. The bird was making the strange noise. Tom wanted to be friends with the bird. He helped the bird out of the box and they played together in the park. The bird could make many fun noises, and Tom liked this new friend. The furry cat and the little bird became best friends, and they played together every day."
"Once upon a time, there was a nice girl named Jane. Jane had a goal - to help people. Every day, Jane thought of ways she could help other people. Jane was very generous and shared her toys with her friends.
One day, Jane heard a loud scream coming from outside. Jane rushed outside to see what was wrong. She saw a puppy stranded in the middle of a deep river. The water was too deep for the little puppy to get out.
Without thinking twice, Jane ran into the river and grabbed the puppy. Jane screamed with happiness as she carried the puppy back to safety. As she reached the other side, everyone cheered and thanked Jane for being so generous.
Jane had achieved her goal! She was very proud and glad she'd been able to help the little puppy. From that day onward, Jane was always ready to help out those in need."
"Once upon a time, there was a powerful dog named Max. Max was very big and strong. He could run very fast and jump very high. Max loved to play with his little friend, a small cat named Lily. They were best friends and played together every day.
One day, Max had an itch on his back. He tried to scratch it, but he couldn't reach it. Max asked Lily, ""Can you help me with my itch?"" Lily tried to help Max, but she was too small. They needed to think of a way to improve the situation.
Just then, a tiny mouse named Tim appeared. Tim was very smart and had an idea. He said, ""I can help you, Max!"" Max and Lily were surprised because they didn't know that a small mouse could be so helpful. Tim climbed onto Max's back and scratched the itch for him. Max was so happy and thanked Tim for his help. From that day on, Max, Lily, and Tim became best friends and played together every day."
"Once upon a time, there was a little dog named Spot. Spot liked to play outside in the messy yard. He would dig holes in the ground and roll around in the dirt. Spot's mom would tell him to stay in the clean grass, but he never listened.
One sunny day, Spot found a big, muddy puddle. He jumped in and splashed around. He got so messy that he was covered in mud from head to toe! Spot's mom saw him and told him to stay out of the puddle.
Spot didn't want to listen, but he knew his mom was right. So, he stayed on the dry ground and played with his ball instead. He still had fun, even though he wasn't in the puddle. His mom was happy that he stayed clean, and Spot learned that it's important to listen to his mom."
"Once upon a time, in a big universe, there was a mysterious box. The box had many colors and shapes. It was a magic box that could match things.
One day, a little girl named Lily found the box. She opened it and saw many different things inside. There were stars, moons, and suns. Lily wanted to match them all, but it was very hard.
Lily tried and tried to match the stars, moons, and suns. She was sad because she could not do it. Then, a happy cat came and helped her. The cat showed Lily how to match the things in the box.
Together, Lily and the cat matched all the stars, moons, and suns. The mysterious box was happy and gave them a big hug. Lily and the cat became best friends and played with the magic box every day."