The Portrait of a Lady
A Photograph
“We’re Not Afraid to Die... if We
Can All Be Together”
Discovering Tut: the Saga
Continues
The Laburnum Top
The Voice of the Rain
The Ailing Planet: the Green
Movement’s Role
Childhood
The Adventure
Silk Road
Father to Son
Reprint 2025-26
Effective reading is receiving from others
their ideas and feelings.
Effective reading involves
 understanding the text
 talking about the text
 thinking about language
 working with words
 noticing form and patterns.
Reprint 2025-26
1. The Portrait of a Lady
Khushwant Singh
Notice these expressions in the text.
Infer their meaning from the context.
My grandmother, like everybody’s grandmother, was an old woman.
She had been old and wrinkled for the twenty years that I had known
her. People said that she had once been young and pretty and had
even had a husband, but that was hard to believe. My grandfather’s
portrait hung above the mantelpiece in the drawing room. He wore a
big turban and loose-fitting clothes. His long, white beard covered the
best part of his chest and he looked at least a hundred years old. He
did not look the sort of person who would have a wife or children. He
looked as if he could only have lots and lots of grandchildren. As for
my grandmother being young and pretty, the thought was almost
revolting. She often told us of the games she used to play as a child.
That seemed quite absurd and undignified on her part and we treated
it like the fables of the Prophets she used to tell us.
She had always been short and fat and slightly bent. Her face was
a criss-cross of wrinkles running from everywhere to everywhere. No,
we were certain she had always been as we had known her. Old, so
terribly old that she could not have grown older, and had stayed at the
same age for twenty years. She could never have been pretty; but she
was always beautiful. She hobbled about the house in spotless white
with one hand resting on her waist to balance her stoop and the other
 the thought was almost revolting
 an expanse of pure white serenity
 a turning-point
 accepted her seclusion with
resignation
 a veritable bedlam of chirrupings
 frivolous rebukes
 the sagging skins of the dilapidated
drum
Reprint 2025-26
4 Hornbill
telling the beads of her rosary. Her silver locks were scattered untidily
over her pale, puckered face, and her lips constantly moved in inaudible
prayer. Yes, she was beautiful. She was like the winter landscape in
the mountains, an expanse of pure white serenity breathing peace
and contentment.
My grandmother and I were good friends. My parents left me with
her when they went to live in the city and we were constantly together.
She used to wake me up in the morning and get me ready for school.
She said her morning prayer in a monotonous sing-song while she
bathed and dressed me in the hope that I would listen and get to know
it by heart; I listened because I loved her voice but never bothered to
learn it. Then she would fetch my wooden slate which she had already
washed and plastered with yellow chalk, a tiny earthen ink-pot and a
red pen, tie them all in a bundle and hand it to me. After a breakfast
of a thick, stale chapatti with a little butter and sugar spread on it,
we went to school. She carried several stale chapattis with her for the
village dogs.
My grandmother always went to school with me because the school
was attached to the temple. The priest taught us the alphabet and
the morning prayer. While the children sat in rows on either side
of the verandah singing the alphabet or the prayer in a chorus, my
grandmother sat inside reading the scriptures. When we had both
finished, we would walk back together. This time the village dogs
would meet us at the temple door. They followed us to our home
growling and fighting with each other for the chapattis we threw to
them.
When my parents were comfortably settled in the city, they sent for
us. That was a turning-point in our friendship. Although we shared
the same room, my grandmother no longer came to school with me. I
used to go to an English school in a motor bus. There were no dogs in
the streets and she took to feeding sparrows in the courtyard of our
city house.
As the years rolled by we saw less of each other. For some time she
continued to wake me up and get me ready for school. When I came
back she would ask me what the teacher had taught me. I would tell
her English words and little things of western science and learning,
the law of gravity, Archimedes’ Principle, the world being round, etc.
This made her unhappy. She could not help me with my lessons. She
did not believe in the things they taught at the English school and was
distressed that there was no teaching about God and the scriptures.
One day I announced that we were being given music lessons. She
Reprint 2025-26
The Portrait of a Lady 5
was very disturbed. To her music had lewd associations. It was the
monopoly of harlots and beggars and not meant for gentlefolk. She
said nothing but her silence meant disapproval. She rarely talked to
me after that.
When I went up to University, I was given a room of my own. The
common link of friendship was snapped. My grandmother accepted
her seclusion with resignation. She rarely left her spinning-wheel to
talk to anyone. From sunrise to sunset she sat by her wheel spinning
and reciting prayers. Only in the afternoon she relaxed for a while to
feed the sparrows. While she sat in the verandah breaking the bread
into little bits, hundreds of little birds collected round her creating
a veritable bedlam of chirrupings. Some came and perched on her
legs, others on her shoulders. Some even sat on her head. She smiled
but never shooed them away. It used to be the happiest half-hour of
the day for her.
When I decided to go abroad for further studies, I was sure my
grandmother would be upset. I would be away for five years, and at
her age one could never tell. But my grandmother could. She was not
even sentimental. She came to leave me at the railway station but did
not talk or show any emotion. Her lips moved in prayer, her mind was
lost in prayer. Her fingers were busy telling the beads of her rosary.
Silently she kissed my forehead, and when I left I cherished the moist
imprint as perhaps the last sign of physical contact between us.
But that was not so. After five years I came back home and was
met by her at the station. She did not look a day older. She still had
no time for words, and while she clasped me in her arms I could
hear her reciting her prayers. Even on the first day of my arrival, her
happiest moments were with her sparrows whom she fed longer and
with frivolous rebukes.
In the evening a change came over her. She did not pray. She
collected the women of the neighbourhood, got an old drum and
started to sing. For several hours she thumped the sagging skins of
the dilapidated drum and sang of the home-coming of warriors. We
had to persuade her to stop to avoid overstraining. That was the first
time since I had known her that she did not pray.
The next morning she was taken ill. It was a mild fever and the
doctor told us that it would go. But my grandmother thought differently.
She told us that her end was near. She said that, since only a few hours
before the close of the last chapter of her life she had omitted to pray,
she was not going to waste any more time talking to us.
Reprint 2025-26
6 Hornbill
We protested. But she ignored our protests. She lay peacefully
in bed praying and telling her beads. Even before we could suspect,
her lips stopped moving and the rosary fell from her lifeless fingers.
A peaceful pallor spread on her face and we knew that she was dead.
We lifted her off the bed and, as is customary, laid her on the ground
and covered her with a red shroud. After a few hours of mourning we
left her alone to make arrangements for her funeral. In the evening we
went to her room with a crude stretcher to take her to be cremated.
The sun was setting and had lit her room and verandah with a blaze
of golden light. We stopped half-way in the courtyard. All over the
verandah and in her room right up to where she lay dead and stiff
wrapped in the red shroud, thousands of sparrows sat scattered on
the floor. There was no chirruping. We felt sorry for the birds and my
mother fetched some bread for them. She broke it into little crumbs,
the way my grandmother used to, and threw it to them. The sparrows
took no notice of the bread. When we carried my grandmother’s corpse
off, they flew away quietly. Next morning the sweeper swept the bread
crumbs into the dustbin.
Understanding the text
Mention
1. The three phases of the author’s relationship with his grandmother before
he left the country to study abroad.
2. Three reasons why the author’s grandmother was disturbed when he
started going to the city school.
3. Three ways in which the author’s grandmother spent her days after he
grew up.
4. The odd way in which the author’s grandmother behaved just before she
died.
5. The way in which the sparrows expressed their sorrow when the author’s
grandmother died.
Talking about the text
Talk to your partner about the following.
1. The author’s grandmother was a religious person. What are the different
ways in which we come to know this?
Reprint 2025-26
The Portrait of a Lady 7
2. Describe the changing relationship between the author and his
grandmother. Did their feelings for each other change?
3. Would you agree that the author’s grandmother was a person strong in
character? If yes, give instances that show this.
4. Have you known someone like the author’s grandmother? Do you feel
the same sense of loss with regard to someone whom you have loved and
lost?
Thinking about language
1. Which language do you think the author and his grandmother used while
talking to each other?
2. Which language do you use to talk to elderly relatives in your family?
3. How would you say ‘a dilapidated drum’ in your language?
4. Can you think of a song or a poem in your language that talks of
homecoming?
Working with words
I. Notice the following uses of the word ‘tell’ in the text.
1. Her fingers were busy telling the beads of her rosary.
2. I would tell her English words and little things of Western science and
learning.
3. At her age one could never tell.
4. She told us that her end was near.
Given below are four different senses of the word ‘tell’. Match the meanings
to the uses listed above.
1. make something known to someone in spoken or written words
2. count while reciting
3. be sure
4. give information to somebody
II. Notice the different senses of the word ‘take’.
1. to take to something: to begin to do something as a habit
2. to take ill: to suddenly become ill
Locate these phrases in the text and notice the way they are used.
III. The word ‘hobble’ means to walk with difficulty because the legs and feet
are in bad condition.
Reprint 2025-26
8 Hornbill
Tick the words in the box below that also refer to a manner of walking.
haggle shuffle stride ride waddle
wriggle paddle swagger trudge slog
Noticing form
Notice the form of the verbs italicised in these sentences.
1. My grandmother was an old woman. She had been old and wrinkled for
the twenty years that I had known her. People said that she had once
been young and pretty and had even had a husband, but that was hard
to believe.
2. When we both had finished we would walk back together.
3. When I came back she would ask me what the teacher had taught me.
4. It was the first time since I had known her that she did not pray.
5. The sun was setting and had lit her room and verandah with a golden
light.
These are examples of the past perfect forms of verbs. When we recount things
in the distant past we use this form.
Things to do
Talk with your family members about elderly people who you have been
intimately connected with and who are not there with you now. Write a short
description of someone you liked a lot.
Notes
Understanding the text
The tasks cover the entire text and help in summarising the various phases
of the autobiographical account and are based on the facts presented.
 Ask the students to read the text silently, paragraph by paragraph, and get
a quick oral feedback on what the main points of each are. For example:
Para1– description of grandmother and grandfather’s photograph.
 At the end of the unit ask students to answer the comprehension questions
first orally and then in writing in point form.
Reprint 2025-26
The Portrait of a Lady 9
For example, when he went to the:
– village school
– city school
– university
Talking about the text
Peer interaction about the text is necessary before students engage in writing
tasks. The questions raised in this section elicit subjective responses to the
facts in the text and also open up possibilities for relating the events to the
reader’s own life and establish the universality of the kind of relationship and
feelings described in the text.
Thinking about language
The questions here try to:
 make the reader visualise the language that must have been used by the
author and his grandmother
 think about their own home language
 find equivalents in their language for English phrases
 relate to songs with emotional import in their own language.
Working with words
Highlight different uses of common words like ‘tell’ and ‘take’; words used for
different ways of walking; and semantically-related word groups. You could
add to the items by using the dictionary for vocabulary enrichment.
Noticing form
Make students notice the use of the past perfect form of the verb that frequently
appear in the text to recount the remote past. You could practise the form
with other examples.
Things to do
Relating the topic of the text to the reader’s real-life experience; writing about
a person who one holds dear.
Reprint 2025-26
A Photograph
Shirley Toulson
The cardboard shows me how it was
When the two girl cousins went paddling,
Each one holding one of my mother’s hands,
And she the big girl — some twelve years or so.
All three stood still to smile through their hair
At the uncle with the camera. A sweet face,
My mother’s, that was before I was born.
And the sea, which appears to have changed less,
Washed their terribly transient feet.
Some twenty — thirty — years later
She’d laugh at the snapshot. “See Betty
And Dolly,” she’d say, “and look how they
Dressed us for the beach.” The sea holiday
Was her past, mine is her laughter. Both wry
With the laboured ease of loss.
Now she’s been dead nearly as many years
As that girl lived. And of this circumstance
There is nothing to say at all.
Its silence silences.
Infer the meanings of the following words from the context.
 paddling transient
Now look up the dictionary to see if your inference is right.
Reprint 2025-26
A Photograph 11
Think it out
1. What does the word ‘cardboard’ denote in the poem? Why has this word
been used?
2. What has the camera captured?
3. What has not changed over the years? Does this suggest something to
you?
4. The poet’s mother laughed at the snapshot. What did this laugh indicate?
5. What is the meaning of the line “Both wry with the laboured ease of loss.”
6. What does “this circumstance” refer to?
7. The three stanzas depict three different phases. What are they?
Notes
Poems are included to heighten students’ sensitivity to literary writing and
to appreciate rhythm and sound patterns in language. Follow these steps:
 Read the poem aloud once without the students looking at the poem.
Ask them a few general questions.
 Re-read the poem with the students looking at the poem. Ask a few more
questions to check comprehension.
Ask students to read the poem silently and answer the questions given,
first orally and then in writing.
 The poem ‘A Photograph’ is placed after ‘The Portrait of a Lady’ because of
the thematic relation between the two.
The questions seek to examine factual and inferential comprehension,
establish empathy and draw attention to the structure of the poem and
choice of words.
2. “We’re Not Afraid to Die...
if We Can All Be Together”
Gordon Cook and Alan East
Notice these expressions in the text.
Infer their meaning from the context.
 honing our seafaring skills  pinpricks in the vast ocean
 ominous silence  a tousled head
 Mayday calls
In July 1976, my wife Mary, son Jonathan, 6, daughter Suzanne, 7, and
I set sail from Plymouth, England, to duplicate the round-the-world
voyage made 200 years earlier by Captain James Cook. For the longest
time, Mary and I — a 37-year-old businessman — had dreamt of sailing
in the wake of the famous explorer, and for the past 16 years we had
spent all our leisure time honing our seafaring skills in British waters.
Our boat Wavewalker, a 23 metre, 30 ton wooden-hulled beauty,
had been professionally built, and we had spent months fitting it out
and testing it in the roughest weather we could find.
The first leg of our planned three-year, 105,000 kilometre journey
passed pleasantly as we sailed down the west coast of Africa to Cape
Town. There, before heading east, we took on two crewmen — American
Larry Vigil and Swiss Herb Seigler — to help us tackle one of the world’s
roughest seas, the southern Indian Ocean.
On our second day out of Cape Town, we began to encounter strong
gales. For the next few weeks, they blew continuously. Gales did not
worry me; but the size of the waves was alarming —up to 15 metres,
as high as our main mast.
Reprint 2025-26
We’re Not Afraid to Die ... 13
December 25 found us 3,500 kilometres east of Cape Town.
Despite atrocious weather, we had a wonderful holiday complete with
a Christmas tree. New Year’s Day saw no improvement in the weather,
but we reasoned that it had to change soon. And it did change — for
the worse.
At dawn on January 2, the waves were gigantic. We were sailing
with only a small storm jib and were still making eight knots. As the
ship rose to the top of each wave we could see endless enormous seas
rolling towards us, and the screaming of the wind and spray was
painful to the ears. To slow the boat down, we dropped the storm jib
and lashed a heavy mooring rope in a loop across the stern. Then we
double-lashed everything, went through our life-raft drill, attached
lifelines, donned oilskins and life jackets — and waited.
The first indication of impending disaster came at about
6 p.m., with an ominous silence. The wind dropped, and the sky
immediately grew dark. Then came a growing roar, and an enormous
cloud towered aft of the ship. With horror, I realised that it was not a
cloud, but a wave like no other I had ever seen. It appeared perfectly
vertical and almost twice the height of the other waves, with a frightful
breaking crest.
The roar increased to a thunder as the stern moved up the face of
the wave, and for a moment I thought we might ride over it. But then
a tremendous explosion shook the deck. A torrent of green and white
water broke over the ship, my head smashed into the wheel and I was
aware of flying overboard and sinking below the waves. I accepted my
approaching death, and as I was losing consciousness, I felt quite
peaceful.
Unexpectedly, my head popped out of the water. A few metres
away, Wavewalker was near capsizing, her masts almost horizontal.
Then a wave hurled her upright, my lifeline jerked taut, I grabbed
the guard rails and sailed through the air into Wavewalker’s main
boom. Subsequent waves tossed me around the deck like a rag doll.
My left ribs cracked; my mouth filled with blood and broken teeth.
Somehow, I found the wheel, lined up the stern for the next wave
and hung on.
Water, Water, Everywhere. I could feel that the ship had water
below, but I dared not abandon the wheel to investigate. Suddenly,
the front hatch was thrown open and Mary appeared. “We’re sinking!”
she screamed. “The decks are smashed; we’re full of water.”
“Take the wheel”, I shouted as I scrambled for the hatch.
Reprint 2025-26
14 Hornbill
Larry and Herb were pumping like madmen. Broken timbers hung at
crazy angles, the whole starboard side bulged inwards; clothes, crockery,
charts, tins and toys sloshed about in deep water.
I half-swam, half-crawled into the children’s cabin. “Are you all
right?” I asked. “Yes,” they answered from an upper bunk. “But my
head hurts a bit,” said Sue, pointing to a big bump above her eyes. I
had no time to worry about bumped heads.
After finding a hammer, screws and canvas, I struggled back on
deck. With the starboard side bashed open, we were taking water
with each wave that broke over us. If I couldn’t make some repairs,
we would surely sink.
Somehow I managed to stretch canvas and secure waterproof hatch
covers across the gaping holes. Some water continued to stream below,
but most of it was now being deflected over the side.
More problems arose when our hand pumps started to block up
with the debris floating around the cabins and the electric pump shortcircuited. The water level rose threateningly. Back on deck I found that
our two spare hand pumps had been wrenched overboard — along with
the forestay sail, the jib, the dinghies and the main anchor.
Then I remembered we had another electric pump under the
chartroom floor. I connected it to an out-pipe, and was thankful to
find that it worked.
The night dragged on with an endless, bitterly cold routine of
pumping, steering and working the radio. We were getting no replies
to our Mayday calls — which was not surprising in this remote corner
of the world.
Sue’s head had swollen alarmingly; she had two enormous black
eyes, and now she showed us a deep cut on her arm. When I asked
why she hadn’t made more of her injuries before this, she replied, “I
didn’t want to worry you when you were trying to save us all.”
____________
By morning on January 3, the pumps had the water level sufficiently
under control for us to take two hours’ rest in rotation. But we still had
a tremendous leak somewhere below the waterline and, on checking,
I found that nearly all the boat’s main rib frames were smashed down
to the keel. In fact, there was nothing holding up a whole section of
the starboard hull except a few cupboard partitions.
We had survived for 15 hours since the wave hit, but Wavewalker
wouldn’t hold together long enough for us to reach Australia. I checked
Reprint 2025-26
We’re Not Afraid to Die ... 15
our charts and calculated that there were two small islands a few
hundred kilometres to the east. One of them, Ile Amsterdam, was a
French scientific base. Our only hope was to reach these pinpricks
in the vast ocean. But unless the wind and seas abated so we could
hoist sail, our chances would be slim indeed. The great wave had put
our auxilliary engine out of action.
On January 4, after 36 hours of continuous pumping, we reached
the last few centimetres of water. Now, we had only to keep pace with
the water still coming in. We could not set any sail on the main mast.
Pressure on the rigging would simply pull the damaged section of the
hull apart, so we hoisted the storm jib and headed for where I thought
the two islands were. Mary found some corned beef and cracker
biscuits, and we ate our first meal in almost two days.
But our respite was short-lived. At 4 p.m. black clouds began
building up behind us; within the hour the wind was back to 40 knots
and the seas were getting higher. The weather continued to deteriorate
throughout the night, and by dawn on January 5, our situation was
again desperate.
When I went in to comfort the children, Jon asked, “Daddy, are we
going to die?” I tried to assure him that we could make it. “But, Daddy,”
he went on, “we aren’t afraid of dying if we can all be together — you
and Mummy, Sue and I.”
I could find no words with which to respond, but I left the
children’s cabin determined to fight the sea with everything I had.
To protect the weakened starboard side, I decided to heave-to —
with the undamaged port hull facing the oncoming waves, using an
improvised sea anchor of heavy nylon rope and two 22 litre plastic
barrels of paraffin.
That evening, Mary and I sat together holding hands, as the motion of
the ship brought more and more water in through the broken planks. We
both felt the end was very near.
But Wavewalker rode out the storm and by the morning of January
6, with the wind easing, I tried to get a reading on the sextant. Back in
the chartroom, I worked on wind speeds, changes of course, drift and
current in an effort to calculate our position. The best I could determine
was that we were somewhere in 150,000 kilometres of ocean looking
for a 65 kilometre-wide island.
While I was thinking, Sue, moving painfully, joined me. The left side
of her head was now very swollen and her blackened eyes narrowed
to slits. She gave me a card she had made.
Reprint 2025-26
16 Hornbill
On the front she had drawn caricatures of Mary and me with the
words: “Here are some funny people. Did they make you laugh? I
laughed a lot as well.” Inside was a message: “Oh, how I love you both.
So this card is to say thank you and let’s hope for the best.” Somehow
we had to make it.
____________
I checked and rechecked my calculations. We had lost our main
compass and I was using a spare which had not been corrected for
magnetic variation. I made an allowance for this and another estimate
of the influence of the westerly currents which flow through this part
of the Indian Ocean.
About 2 p.m., I went on deck and asked Larry to steer a course of
185 degrees. If we were lucky, I told him with a conviction I did not
feel, he could expect to see the island at about 5 p.m.
Then with a heavy heart, I went below, climbed on my bunk and
amazingly, dozed off. When I woke it was 6 p.m., and growing dark. I
knew we must have missed the island, and with the sail we had left, we
couldn’t hope to beat back into the westerly winds.
At that moment, a tousled head appeared by my bunk. “Can I have
a hug?” Jonathan asked. Sue was right behind him.
“Why am I getting a hug now?” I asked.
“Because you are the best daddy in the whole world — and the best
captain,” my son replied.
“Not today, Jon, I’m afraid.”
“Why, you must be,” said Sue in a matter-of-fact voice. “You found
the island.”
“What!” I shouted.
“It’s out there in front of us,” they chorused, “as big as a battleship.”
I rushed on deck and gazed with relief at the stark outline of Ile
Amsterdam. It was only a bleak piece of volcanic rock, with little
vegetation — the most beautiful island in the world!
We anchored offshore for the night, and the next morning all 28
inhabitants of the island cheered as they helped us ashore.
With land under my feet again, my thoughts were full of Larry
and Herbie, cheerful and optimistic under the direst stress, and of
Mary, who stayed at the wheel for all those crucial hours. Most of all,
I thought of a seven-year-old girl, who did not want us to worry about
Reprint 2025-26
We’re Not Afraid to Die ... 17
a head injury (which subsequently took six minor operations to remove
a recurring blood clot between skin and skull), and of a six-year-old
boy who was not afraid to die.
Understanding the text
1. List the steps taken by the captain
(i) to protect the ship when rough weather began.
(ii) to check the flooding of the water in the ship.
2. Describe the mental condition of the voyagers on 4 and 5 January.
3. Describe the shifts in the narration of the events as indicated in the three
sections of the text. Give a subtitle to each section.
Talking about the text
Discuss the following questions with your partner.
1. What difference did you notice between the reaction of the adults and the
children when faced with danger?
2. How does the story suggest that optimism helps to endure “the direst
stress”?
3. What lessons do we learn from such hazardous experiences when we are
face-to-face with death?
4. Why do you think people undertake such adventurous expeditions in spite
of the risks involved?
Thinking about language
1. We have come across words like ‘gale’ and ‘storm’ in the account. Here
are two more words for ‘storm’: typhoon, cyclone. How many words does
your language have for ‘storm’?
2. Here are the terms for different kinds of vessels: yacht, boat, canoe, ship,
steamer, schooner. Think of similar terms in your language.
3. ‘Catamaran’ is a kind of a boat. Do you know which Indian language this
word is derived from? Check the dictionary.
Reprint 2025-26
18 Hornbill
4. Have you heard any boatmen’s songs? What kind of emotions do these
songs usually express?
Working with words
1. The following words used in the text as ship terminology are also commonly
used in another sense. In what contexts would you use the other meaning?
 knot stern boom hatch anchor
2. The following three compound words end in -ship. What does each of them
mean?
airship flagship lightship
3. The following are the meanings listed in the dictionary against the phrase
‘take on’. In which meaning is it used in the third paragraph of the account:
take on sth: to begin to have a particular quality or appearance;
to assume sth
take sb on: to employ sb; to engage sb
 to accept sb as one’s opponent in a game, contest or
conflict
take sb/sth on: to decide to do sth; to allow sth/sb to enter e.g. a
bus, plane or ship; to take sth/sb on board
Things to do
1. Given on the next page is a picture of a yacht. Label the parts of the yacht
using the terms given in the box.
bow cabin rudder cockpit
stern boom mainsail mast
Reprint 2025-26
We’re Not Afraid to Die ... 19
2. Here is some information downloaded from the Internet on Ile Amsterdam.
You can view images of the isle if you go online.
Location South Indian Ocean, between
southernmost parts of Australia
and South Africa
Latitude and longitude 37 92 S, 77 67 E
Sovereignty France
Political status notes Part of French Southern and
Antarctic Lands
Population 35
Census notes Meteorological station staff
Land area in square
kilometres
86
3. Locate Ile Amsterdam on the world map.
Reprint 2025-26
20 Hornbill
This is a first person account of an adventurous ordeal that a family
experiences.
Understanding the text
This section deals with factual and global comprehension. Practice is given
in describing and noticing text organisation.
Talking about the text
Peer interaction about subjective responses to the text; empathy with and
comment on universal experiences; and human behaviour related to risktaking and adventure.
Thinking about language
3. Discovering Tut: the Saga Continues
A. R. Williams
Notice these expressions in the text.
Infer their meaning from the context.
 forensic reconstruction  funerary treasures
 scudded across  circumvented
 casket grey  computed tomography
 resurrection  eerie detail
He was just a teenager when he
died. The last heir of a powerful
family that had ruled Egypt
and its empire for centuries,
he was laid to rest laden with
gold and eventually forgotten.
Since the discovery of his tomb
in 1922, the modern world has
speculated about what happened
to him, with murder being the
most extreme possibility. Now,
leaving his tomb for the first
time in almost 80 years, Tut
has undergone a CT scan that
offers new clues about his life and
death — and provides precise
data for an accurate forensic
reconstruction of the boyish
pharaoh.
Reprint 2025-26
22 Hornbill
An angry wind stirred up ghostly dust devils as King Tut was taken
from his resting place in the ancient Egyptian cemetery known as
the Valley of the Kings*. Dark-bellied clouds had scudded across the
desert sky all day and now were veiling the stars in casket grey. It
was 6 p.m. on 5 January 2005. The world’s most famous mummy
glided head first into a CT scanner brought here to probe the lingering
medical mysteries of this little understood young ruler who died more
than 3,300 years ago.
All afternoon the usual line of tourists from around the world had
descended into the cramped, rock-cut tomb some 26 feet underground
to pay their respects. They gazed at the murals on the walls of the burial
chamber and peered at Tut’s gilded face, the most striking feature of his
mummy-shaped outer coffin lid. Some visitors read from guidebooks in a
whisper. Others stood silently, perhaps pondering Tut’s untimely death in
his late teens, or wondering with a shiver if the pharaoh’s curse — death
or misfortune falling upon those who disturbed him — was really true.
“The mummy is in very bad condition because of what Carter did in
the 1920s,” said Zahi Hawass, Secretary General of Egypt’s Supreme
Council of Antiquities, as he leaned over the body for a long first look.
Carter—Howard Carter, that is — was the British archaeologist who in
1922 discovered Tut’s tomb after years of futile searching. Its contents,
though hastily ransacked in antiquity, were surprisingly complete.
They remain the richest royal collection ever found and have become
part of the pharaoh’s legend. Stunning artefacts in gold, their eternal
brilliance meant to guarantee resurrection, caused a sensation at
the time of the discovery — and still get the most attention. But Tut
was also buried with everyday things he’d want in the afterlife: board
games, a bronze razor, linen undergarments, cases of food and wine.
After months of carefully recording the pharaoh’s funerary
treasures, Carter began investigating his three nested coffins. Opening
the first, he found a shroud adorned with garlands of willow and olive
leaves, wild celery, lotus petals, and cornflowers, the faded evidence
of a burial in March or April. When he finally reached the mummy,
though, he ran into trouble. The ritual resins had hardened, cementing
Tut to the bottom of his solid gold coffin. “No amount of legitimate
force could move them,” Carter wrote later. “What was to be done?”
The sun can beat down like a hammer this far south in Egypt, and
Carter tried to use it to loosen the resins. For several hours he set
the mummy outside in blazing sunshine that heated it to 149 degrees
* See map on next page
Reprint 2025-26
Discovering Tut: the Saga Continues 23
(map not to scale)
Africa
ASIA
River
Egypt Nile
Reprint 2025-26
24 Hornbill
Fahrenheit. Nothing budged. He reported with scientific detachment
that “the consolidated material had to be chiselled away from beneath
the limbs and trunk before it was possible to raise the king’s remains.”
In his defence, Carter really had little choice. If he hadn’t
cut the mummy free, thieves most certainly would have
circumvented the guards and ripped it apart to remove the
gold. In Tut’s time the royals were fabulously wealthy, and they
thought — or hoped — they could take their riches with them. For
his journey to the great beyond, King Tut was lavished with glittering
goods: precious collars, inlaid necklaces and bracelets, rings, amulets,
a ceremonial apron, sandals, sheaths for his fingers and toes, and
the now iconic inner coffin and mask — all of pure gold. To separate
Tut from his adornments, Carter’s men removed the mummy’s head
and severed nearly every major joint. Once they had finished, they
reassembled the remains on a layer of sand in a wooden box with
padding that concealed the damage, the bed where Tut now rests.
Archaeology has changed substantially in the intervening
decades, focusing less on treasure and more on the fascinating
details of life and intriguing mysteries of death. It also uses more
sophisticated tools, including medical technology. In 1968, more
than 40 years after Carter’s discovery, an anatomy professor
X-rayed the mummy and revealed a startling fact: beneath the resin that
cakes his chest, his breast-bone and front ribs are missing.
Today diagnostic imaging can be done with computed tomography,
or CT, by which hundreds of X-rays in cross section are put together
like slices of bread to create a three-dimensional virtual body. What
more would a CT scan reveal of Tut than the X-ray? And could it answer
two of the biggest questions still lingering about him — how did he
die, and how old was he at the time of his death?
King Tut’s demise was a big event, even by royal standards. He
was the last of his family’s line, and his funeral was the death rattle of
a dynasty. But the particulars of his passing away and its aftermath
are unclear.
Amenhotep III — Tut’s father or grandfather — was a powerful
pharaoh who ruled for almost four decades at the height of the
eighteenth dynasty’s golden age. His son Amenhotep IV succeeded
him and initiated one of the strangest periods in the history of ancient
Egypt. The new pharaoh promoted the worship of the Aten, the sun
disk, changed his name to Akhenaten, or ‘servant of the Aten,’ and
moved the religious capital from the old city of Thebes to the new city
of Akhetaten, known now as Amarna. He further shocked the country
Reprint 2025-26
Discovering Tut: the Saga Continues 25
by attacking Amun, a major god, smashing his images and closing
his temples. “It must have been a horrific time,” said Ray Johnson,
director of the University of Chicago’s research centre in Luxor, the
site of ancient Thebes. “The family that had ruled for centuries was
coming to an end, and then Akhenaten went a little wacky.”
After Akhenaten’s death, a mysterious ruler named Smenkhkare
appeared briefly and exited with hardly a trace. And then a very young
Tutankhaten took the throne — King Tut as he’s widely known today.
The boy king soon changed his name to Tutankhamun, ‘living image
of Amun,’ and oversaw a restoration of the old ways. He reigned for
about nine years —and then died unexpectedly.
Regardless of his fame and the speculations about his fate, Tut is one
mummy among many in Egypt. How many? No one knows. The Egyptian
Mummy Project, which began an inventory in late 2003, has recorded almost
600 so far and is still counting. The next phase: scanning the mummies
with a portable CT machine donated by the National Geographic Society
and Siemens, its manufacturer. King Tut is one of the first mummies to be
scanned — in death, as in life, moving regally ahead of his countrymen.
A CT machine scanned the mummy head to toe, creating 1,700
digital X-ray images in cross section. Tut’s head, scanned in 0.62
millimetre slices to register its intricate structures, takes on eerie
detail in the resulting image. With Tut’s entire body similarly recorded,
a team of specialists in radiology, forensics, and anatomy began to
probe the secrets that the winged goddesses of a gilded burial shrine
protected for so long.
The night of the scan, workmen carried Tut from the tomb in
his box. Like pallbearers they climbed a ramp and a flight of stairs
into the swirling sand outside, then rose on a hydraulic lift into the
trailer that held the scanner. Twenty minutes later two men emerged,
sprinted for an office nearby, and returned with a pair of white plastic
fans. The million-dollar scanner had quit because of sand in a cooler
fan. “Curse of the pharaoh,” joked a guard nervously.
Eventually the substitute fans worked well enough to finish the
procedure. After checking that no data had been lost, the technicians
turned Tut over to the workmen, who carried him back to his tomb.
Less than three hours after he was removed from his coffin, the
pharaoh again rested in peace where the funerary priests had laid
him so long ago.
Back in the trailer a technician pulled up astonishing images of
Tut on a computer screen. A grey head took shape from a scattering
Reprint 2025-26
26 Hornbill
of pixels, and the technician spun and tilted it in every direction. Neck
vertebrae appeared as clearly as in an anatomy class. Other images
revealed a hand, several views of the rib cage, and a transection of
the skull. But for now the pressure was off. Sitting back in his chair,
Zahi Hawass smiled, visibly relieved that nothing had gone seriously
wrong. “I didn’t sleep last night, not for a second,” he said. “I was so
worried. But now I think I will go and sleep.”
Mural in King Tut’s tomb showing King
Tut with Osiris, the god of the afterlife
By the time we left the trailer, descending metal stairs to the sandy
ground, the wind had stopped. The winter air lay cold and still, like
death itself, in this valley of the departed. Just above the entrance to
Tut’s tomb stood Orion — the constellation that the ancient Egyptians
knew as the soul of Osiris, the god of the afterlife — watching over
the boy king.
(Source: National Geographic, Vol 207, No. 6)
Reprint 2025-26
Discovering Tut: the Saga Continues 27
Understanding the text
1. Give reasons for the following.
(i) King Tut’s body has been subjected to repeated scrutiny.
(ii) Howard Carter’s investigation was resented.
(iii) Carter had to chisel away the solidified resins to raise the king’s
remains.
(iv) Tut’s body was buried along with gilded treasures.
(v) The boy king changed his name from Tutankhaten to Tutankhamun.
2. (i) List the deeds that led Ray Johnson to describe Akhenaten as “wacky”.
(ii) What were the results of the CT scan?
(iii) List the advances in technology that have improved forensic analysis.
(iv) Explain the statement, “King Tut is one of the first mummies to be
scanned — in death, as in life...”
Talking about the text
Discuss the following in groups of two pairs, each pair in a group taking
opposite points of view.
1. Scientific intervention is necessary to unearth buried mysteries.
2. Advanced technology gives us conclusive evidence of past events.
3. Traditions, rituals and funerary practices must be respected.
4. Knowledge about the past is useful to complete our knowledge of the world
we live in.
Thinking about language
1. Read the following piece of information from The Encyclopedia of Language
by David Crystal.
Egyptian is now extinct: its history dates from before the third
millennium B.C., preserved in many hieroglyphic inscriptions and
papyrus manuscripts. Around the second century A.D., it developed into
a language known as Coptic. Coptic may still have been used as late
as the early nineteenth century and is still used as a religious language
by Monophysite Christians in Egypt.
2. What do you think are the reasons for the extinction of languages?
3. Do you think it is important to preserve languages?
4. In what ways do you think we could help prevent the extinction of languages
and dialects?
Reprint 2025-26
28 Hornbill
Working with words
1. Given below are some interesting combinations of words. Explain why they
have been used together.
(i) ghostly dust devils (vi) dark-bellied clouds
(ii) desert sky (vii) casket grey
(iii) stunning artefacts (viii) eternal brilliance
(iv) funerary treasures (ix) ritual resins
(v) scientific detachment (x) virtual body
2. Here are some commonly used medical terms. Find out their meanings.
CT scan MRI tomography
autopsy dialysis ECG
post mortem angiography biopsy
Things to do
1. The constellation Orion is associated with the legend of Osiris, the god of
the afterlife.
Find out the astronomical descriptions and legends associated with the
following.
(i) Ursa Major (Saptarishi mandala)
(ii) Polaris (Dhruva tara)
(iii) Pegasus (Winged horse)
(iv) Sirius (Dog star)
(v) Gemini (Mithuna)
2. Some of the leaves and flowers mentioned in the passage for adorning
the dead are willow, olive, celery, lotus, cornflower. Which of these are
common in our country?
3. Name some leaves and flowers that are used as adornments in our country.
Reprint 2025-26
Discovering Tut: the Saga Continues 29
Notes
Understanding the text
Factual comprehension: giving reasons, listing
Talking about the text
Debate on issues raised in the text related to rediscovering history with the
help of technology; respect for traditions (reflection on issues)
Thinking about language
Extinction of language and language preservation
Working with words
Understanding adjectival collocations; common medical terms
Things to do
 Relating astronomical facts and legends (across the curriculum)
 Finding out botanical correlates
Reprint 2025-26
The Laburnum Top
Ted Hughes
The Laburnum top is silent, quite still
In the afternoon yellow September sunlight,
A few leaves yellowing, all its seeds fallen.
Till the goldfinch comes, with a twitching chirrup
A suddenness, a startlement, at a branch end.
Then sleek as a lizard, and alert, and abrupt,
She enters the thickness, and a machine starts up
Of chitterings, and a tremor of wings, and trillings —
The whole tree trembles and thrills.
It is the engine of her family.
She stokes it full, then flirts out to a branch-end
Showing her barred face identity mask
Then with eerie delicate whistle-chirrup whisperings
She launches away, towards the infinite
And the laburnum subsides to empty.
laburnum: a short tree with hanging branches, yellow flowers and
poisonous seeds
goldfinch: a small singing bird with yellow feathers on its wings
Reprint 2025-26
The Laburnum Top 31
Find out
1. What laburnum is called in your language.
2. Which local bird is like the goldfinch.
Think it out
1. What do you notice about the beginning and the ending of the poem?
2. To what is the bird’s movement compared? What is the basis for the
comparison?
3. Why is the image of the engine evoked by the poet?
4. What do you like most about the poem?
5. What does the phrase “her barred face identity mask” mean?
Note down
1. the sound words
2. the movement words
3. the dominant colour in the poem.
List the following
1. Words which describe ‘sleek’, ‘alert’ and ‘abrupt’.
2. Words with the sound ‘ch’ as in ‘chart’ and ‘tr’ as in ‘trembles’ in the poem.
3. Other sounds that occur frequently in the poem.
Thinking about language
Look for some other poem on a bird or a tree in English or any other language.
Try this out
Write four lines in verse form on any tree that you see around you.
Reprint 2025-26
32 Hornbill
Notes
This poem has been placed after a text which has references to names of
plants for thematic sequencing.
Understanding the poem
 Glossing of ‘laburnum’ and ‘goldfinch’

 Factual understanding
 Movement of thought and structuring (poetic sensitivity)
 Focus on figures of speech and imagery used (poetic sensitivity)
 Attention to sounds, lexical collocations (poetic sensitivity)
Thinking about language
 Finding equivalents in other languages (multilingualism)
 Relating to thematically similar poems in other languages (multilingualism)
 Attempt at creativity
Reprint 2025-26
the Voice of the Rain
Walt Whitman
And who art thou? said I to the soft-falling shower,
Which, strange to tell, gave me an answer, as here translated:
I am the Poem of Earth, said the voice of the rain,
Eternal I rise impalpable out of the land and the bottomless sea,
Upward to heaven, whence, vaguely form’d, altogether changed,
and yet the same,
I descend to lave the droughts, atomies, dust-layers of the globe,
And all that in them without me were seeds only, latent, unborn;
And forever, by day and night, I give back life to my own origin,
And make pure and beautify it;
(For song, issuing from its birth-place, after fulfilment, wandering
Reck’d or unreck’d, duly with love returns.)
impalpable: something that cannot be touched
lave: wash; bathe
atomies: tiny particles
latent: hidden
Reprint 2025-26
34 Hornbill
Think it out
I. 1. There are two voices in the poem. Who do they belong to? Which lines
indicate this?
2. What does the phrase “strange to tell” mean?
3. There is a parallel drawn between rain and music. Which words indicate
this? Explain the similarity between the two.
4. How is the cyclic movement of rain brought out in the poem? Compare
it with what you have learnt in science.
5. Why are the last two lines put within brackets?
6. List the pairs of opposites found in the poem.
II. Notice the following sentence patterns.
1. And who art thou? said I to the soft-falling shower.
2. I am the Poem of Earth, said the voice of the rain.
3. Eternal I rise
4. For song … duly with love returns
 Rewrite the above sentences in prose.
III. Look for some more poems on the rain and see how this one is different
from them.
Notes
This is a nature poem celebrating the coming of the rain.
Understanding the poem
 Sense of the poem
 Relating to the process of rainfall scientifically (across the curriculum)
 Noticing sentence structure in poems
 Voices in the poem
 Comparison with other rain poems
Reprint 2025-26